
{Introduction to the ECSB}
these opinions, those presbyters who preceded us, and who were conversant with the apostles, did not hand down to you.   location 19308
. . .
For, while I was yet a boy, I saw you in Lower Asia with Polycarp, distinguishing thyself in the royal court, and endeavouring to gain his approbation. For I have a more vivid recollection of what occurred at that time than of recent events (inasmuch as the experiences of childhood, keeping pace with the growth of the soul, become incorporated with it); so that I can even describe the place where the blessed Polycarp used to sit and discourse-his going out, too, and his coming in-his general mode of life and personal appearance, together with the discourses which he delivered to the people; also how he would speak of his familiar intercourse with John, and with the rest of those who had seen the Lord; and how he would call their words to remembrance. Whatsoever things he had heard from them respecting the Lord, both with regard to His miracles and His teaching, Polycarp having thus received [information] from the eye-witnesses of the Word of life, would recount them all in harmony with the Scriptures.   location 19308
. . .
And I can bear witness before God, that if that blessed and apostolical presbyter had heard any such thing, he would have cried out, and stopped his ears, exclaiming as he was wont to do:   location 19317
. . .
This fact, too, can be made clear, from his Epistles which he despatched, whether to the neighboring Churches to confirm them, or to certain of the brethren, admonishing and exhorting them.   location 19319
Irenaeus Fragments from the Lost Writings, Sec. 2. 

{Introduction to the ECSB}
On the contrary, those presbyters who preceded you, and who did not observe [this custom], sent the Eucharist to those of other dioceses who did observe it. And when the blessed Polycarp was sojourning in Rome in the time of Anicetus, although a slight controversy had arisen among them as to certain other points, they were at once well inclined towards each other [with regard to the matter in hand], not willing that any quarrel should arise between them upon this head. For neither could Anicetus persuade Polycarp to forego the observance [in his own way], inasmuch as these things had been always [so] observed by John the disciple of our Lord, and by other apostles with whom he had been conversant; nor, on the other hand, could Polycarp succeed in persuading Anicetus to keep [the observance in his way], for he maintained that he was bound to adhere to the usage of the presbyters who preceded him. And in this state of affairs they held fellowship with each other;   location 19331
Irenaeus Fragments from the Lost Writings, Sec. 3. 

{Ex 37:2}
VIII For as the ark [of the covenant] was gilded within and without with pure gold, so was also the body of Christ pure and resplendent; for it was adorned within by the Word, and shielded without by the Spirit, in order that from both [materials] the splendour of the natures might be clearly shown forth.   location 19358
Irenaeus Fragments from the Lost Writings, Sec. 8. 

{1 Cor 15:35-38, 42}
XII We therefore have formed the belief that [our] bodies also do rise again. For although they go to corruption, yet they do not perish; for the earth, receiving the remains, preserves them, even like fertile seed mixed with more fertile ground. Again, as a bare grain is sown, and, germinating by the command of God its Creator, rises again, clothed upon and glorious, but not before it has died and suffered decomposition, and become mingled with the earth; so [it is seen from this, that] we have not entertained a vain belief in the resurrection of the body. But although it is dissolved at the appointed time, because of the primeval disobedience, it is placed, as it were, in the crucible of the earth, to be recast again; not then as this corruptible [body], but pure, and no longer subject to decay: so that to each body its own soul shall be restored;   location 19368
Irenaeus Fragments from the Lost Writings, Sec. 12. 

{Mt 26:26-28}
XIII For when the Greeks, having arrested the slaves of Christian catechumens, then used force against them, in order to learn from them some secret thing [practised] among Christians, these slaves, having nothing to say that would meet the wishes of their tormentors, except that they had heard from their masters that the divine communion was the body and blood of Christ, and imagining that it was actually flesh and blood, gave their inquisitors answer to that effect.   location 19379
Irenaeus Fragments from the Lost Writings, Sec. 13. 

{Gen 3:16-19}
14. If then corruptible, it is obvious that she was also mortal. But if mortal, then there was certainly no curse; nor was that a [condemnatory] sentence, when the voice of God spake to the man, "For earth thou art, and unto earth shall thou return," as the true course of things proceeds [now and always].   location 19404
Irenaeus Fragments from the Lost Writings, Sec. 14. 

{Gen 3:7}
But with the opening [of their eyes] referred to, they made entrance upon the path of death.   location 19409
Irenaeus Fragments from the Lost Writings, Sec. 14. 

{Preface to Deuteronomy}
XVI Expounding again the Law to that generation which followed those who were slain in the wilderness, he published Deuteronomy; not as giving to them a different law from that which had been appointed for their fathers, but as recapitulating this latter, in order that they, by hearing what had happened to their fathers, might fear God with their whole heart.   location 19414
Irenaeus Fragments from the Lost Writings, Sec. 16. 

{Gen 49:3-22}
XVII By these Christ was typified, and acknowledged, and brought into the world; for He was prefigured in Joseph: then from Levi and Judah He was descended according to the flesh, as King and Priest; and He was acknowledged by Simeon in the temple: through Zebulon He was believed in among the Gentiles, as says the prophet, "the land of Zabulon;" and through Benjamin [that is, Paul] He was glorified, by being preached throughout all the world.   location 19417
Irenaeus Fragments from the Lost Writings, Sec. 17. 

{Preface to Joshua}
XIX "Take unto thee Joshua ('Iesoun) the son of Nun." For it was proper that Moses should lead the people out of Egypt, but that Jesus (Joshua) should lead them into the inheritance. Also that Moses, as was the case with the Law, should cease to be, but that Joshua ('Iesoun), as the word, and no untrue type of the Word made flesh (enupostatou), should be a preacher to the people. Then again, [it was fit] that Moses should give manna as food to the fathers, but Joshua wheat; as the first-fruits of life, a type of the body of Christ, as also the Scripture declares that the manna of the Lord ceased when the people had eaten wheat from the land.   location 19425
Irenaeus Fragments from the Lost Writings, Sec. 19. 

{Num 22:23}
XXII Now the angel who appeared to Balaam was the Word Himself; and in His hand He held a sword, to indicate the power which He had from above.   location 19443
Irenaeus Fragments from the Lost Writings, Sec. 22. 

{2 Kings 6:5,6}
XXVIII "And the man of God said, Where did it fall? And he showed him the place. And he cut down a tree, and cast it in there, and the iron floated." This was a sign that souls should be borne aloft (anagoges psuchon) through the instrumentality of wood, upon which He suffered who can lead those souls aloft that follow His ascension. This event was also an indication of the fact, that when the holy soul of Christ descended [to Hades], many souls ascended and were seen in their bodies.   location 19460
. . .
For just as the wood, which is the lighter body, was submerged in the water; but the iron, the heavier one, floated: so, when the Word of God became one with flesh, by a physical and hypostatic union, the heavy and terrestrial [part], having been rendered immortal, was borne up into heaven, by the divine nature, after the resurrection.   location 19463
Irenaeus Fragments from the Lost Writings, Sec. 28. 

{Preface to Matthew}
XXIX The Gospel according to Matthew was written to the Jews. For they laid particular stress upon the fact that Christ [should be] of the seed of David. Matthew also, who had a still greater desire [to establish this point], took particular pains to afford them convincing proof that Christ is of the seed of David; and therefore he commences with [an account of] His genealogy.   location 19466
Irenaeus Fragments from the Lost Writings, Sec. 29. 

{Mt 13:31-32}
XXXI Observe that, by means of the grain of mustard seed in the parable, the heavenly doctrine is denoted which is sown like seed in the world, as in a field, [seed] which has an inherent force, fiery and powerful. For the Judge of the whole world is thus proclaimed, who, having been hidden in the heart of the earth in a tomb for three days, and having become a great tree, has stretched forth His branches to the ends of the earth. Sprouting out from Him, the twelve apostles, having become fair and fruitful boughs, were made a shelter for the nations as for the fowls of heaven, under which boughs, all having taken refuge, as birds flocking to a nest, have been made partakers of that wholesome and celestial food which is derived from them.   location 19472
Irenaeus Fragments from the Lost Writings, Sec. 31.

{Ex 2:10}
XXXII Josephus says, that when Moses had been brought up in the royal palaces, he was chosen as general against the Ethiopians; and having proved victorious, obtained in marriage the daughter of that king, since indeed, out of her affection for him, she delivered the city up to him.   location 19478
Irenaeus Fragments from the Lost Writings, Sec. 32.

{Num 12:10}
Why was it, that when these two (Aaron and Miriam) had both acted with despite towards him (Moses), the latter alone was adjudged punishment? First, because the woman was the more culpable, since both nature and the Law place the woman in a subordinate condition to the man. Or perhaps it was that Aaron was to a certain degree excusable, in consideration of his being the elder [brother], and adorned with the dignity of high priest. Then again, inasmuch as the leper was accounted by the Law unclean, while at the same time the origin and foundation of the priesthood lay in Aaron, [the Lord] did not award a similar punishment to him, lest this stigma should attach itself to the entire [sacerdotal] race; but by means of his sister's [example] He awoke his fears, and taught him the same lesson.   location 19481
Irenaeus Fragments from the Lost Writings, Sec. 33.

{Num 12:14}
Upon this the Lord, who loves mankind, made him understand how He had not chastened her as a judge, but as a father; for He said, "If her father had spit in her face, should she not be ashamed? Let her be shut out from the camp seven days, and after that let her come in again."   location 19488
Irenaeus Fragments from the Lost Writings, Sec. 33.

{2 Kings 5:14}
XXXIV "And dipped himself," says [the Scripture], "seven times in Jordan." It was not for nothing that Naaman of old, when suffering from leprosy, was purified upon his being baptized, but [it served] as an indication to us. For as we are lepers in sin, we are made clean, by means of the sacred water and the invocation of the Lord, from our old transgressions; being spiritually regenerated as new-born babes, even as the Lord has declared: "Except a man be born again through water and the Spirit, he shall not enter into the kingdom of heaven."   location 19498
Irenaeus Fragments from the Lost Writings, Sec. 34.

{Rom 10:8}
36. the doctrine of the cross; of which if any man "taste," he will not accede to the disputations and quibbles of proud and puffed-up men, who go into matters of which they have no perception. For the truth is unsophisticated (aschematistos); and "the word is nigh thee, in thy mouth and in thy heart," as the same apostle declares, being easy of comprehension to those who are obedient.   location 19507
Irenaeus Fragments from the Lost Writings, Sec. 36.

{1 Tim 1:4}
For this is the affinity of the apostolical teaching and the most holy "faith delivered unto us," which the unlearned receive, and those of slender knowledge have taught, not "giving heed to endless genealogies," but studying rather [to observe] a straightforward course of life; lest, having been deprived of the Divine Spirit, they fail to attain to the kingdom of heaven. For truly the first thing is to deny one's self and to follow Christ; and those who do this are borne onward to perfection, having fulfilled all their Teacher's will, becoming sons of God by spiritual regeneration, and heirs of the kingdom of heaven; those who seek which first shall not be forsaken.   location 19510
Irenaeus Fragments from the Lost Writings, Sec. 36.

{Mal 1:11; Rev 5:8; Rom 12:1; Jn 4:24}
XXXVII Those who have become acquainted with the secondary (i.e., under Christ) constitutions of the apostles, are aware that the Lord instituted a new oblation in the new covenant, according to [the declaration of] Malachi the prophet. For, "from the rising of the sun even to the setting my name has been glorified among the Gentiles, and in every place incense is offered to my name, and a pure sacrifice;" as John also declares in the Apocalypse: "The incense is the prayers of the saints." Then again, Paul exhorts us "to present our bodies a living sacrifice, holy, acceptable unto God, which is your reasonable service." And again, "Let us offer the sacrifice of praise, that is, the fruit of the lips." Now those oblations are not according to the Law, the handwriting of which the Lord took away from the midst by cancelling it; but they are according to the Spirit, for we must worship God "in spirit and in truth." And therefore the oblation of the Eucharist is not a carnal one, but a spiritual; and in this respect it is pure. For we make an oblation to God of the bread and the cup of blessing, giving Him thanks in that He has commanded the earth to bring forth these fruits for our nourishment. And then, when we have perfected the oblation, we invoke the Holy Spirit, that He may exhibit this sacrifice, both the bread the body of Christ, and the cup the blood of Christ, in order that the receivers of these antitypes may obtain remission of sins and life eternal. Those persons, then, who perform these oblations in remembrance of the Lord, do not fall in with Jewish views, but, performing the service after a spiritual manner, they shall be called sons of wisdom.   location 19515
Irenaeus Fragments from the Lost Writings, Sec. 37

{Col 2:16}
XXXVIII The apostles ordained, that "we should not judge anyone in respect to meat or drink, or in regard to a feast day, or the new moons, or the sabbaths." Whence then these contentions? whence these schisms? We keep the feast, but in the leaven of malice and wickedness, cutting in pieces the Church of God; and we preserve what belongs to its exterior, that we may cast away these better things, faith and love. We have heard from the prophetic words that these feasts and fasts are displeasing to the Lord.   location 19528
Irenaeus Fragments from the Lost Writings, Sec. 38.

{2 Cor 4:4}
XLVI "The god of the world;" that is, Satan, who was designated God to those who believe not.   location 19554
Irenaeus Fragments from the Lost Writings, Sec. 46.

{Mt 10:28}
XLIX.We are convinced that there exist [so to speak] two men in each one of us. The one is confessedly a hidden thing, while the other stands apparent; one is corporeal, the other spiritual; although the generation of both may be compared to that of twins. For both are revealed to the world as but one, for the soul was not anterior to the body in its essence; nor, in regard to its formation, did the body precede the soul: but both these were produced at one time; and their nourishment consists in purity and sweetness.   location 19566
Irenaeus Fragments from the Lost Writings, Sec. 49.

{1 Cor 10:4}
LII   The sacred books acknowledge with regard to Christ, that as He is the Son of man, so is the same Being not a [mere] man; and as He is flesh, so is He also spirit, and the Word of God, and God. And as He was born of Mary in the last times, so did He also proceed from God as the First-begotten of every creature; and as He hungered, so did He satisfy [others]; and as He thirsted, so did He of old cause the Jews to drink, for the "Rock was Christ" Himself: thus does Jesus now give to His believing people power to drink spiritual waters, which spring up to life eternal.   location 19581
Irenaeus Fragments from the Lost Writings, Sec. 52.

{Jn 8:59}
And as He was capable of being handled and touched, so again did He, in a non-apprehensible form, pass through the midst of those who sought to injure Him, and entered without impediment through closed doors.   location 19588
Irenaeus Fragments from the Lost Writings, Sec. 52.

{Trinity}
LIII   He is the perfect Intelligence, the Word of God, who was begotten before the light; that He was the Founder of the universe, along with it (light), and the Maker of man; that He is All in all: Patriarch among the patriarchs; Law in the Laws; Chief Priest among priests; Ruler among kings; the Prophet among prophets; the Angel among angels; the Man among men; Son in the Father; God in God; King to all eternity.   location 19596
. . .
the Prince of the angelic powers; God of God; Son of the Father; Jesus Christ; King forever and ever.   location 19600
. . .
Leader of the angelic host; God of God; Jesus Christ our Savior.   location 19614
Irenaeus Fragments from the Lost Writings, Sec. 53.

{Preface to Genesis; Dan 3:17-26}
LV. Abraham therefore, Isaac, and Jacob, our fathers, are to be esteemed before all, since they did indeed afford us such early examples of virtue. How many martyrs can be compared to Daniel? How many martyrs, I ask, can rival the three youths in Babylon, although the memory of the former has not been brought before us so conspicuously as that of the latter? These were truly first-fruits, and indications of the [succeeding] fructification. Hence God has directed their life to be recorded, as a model for those who should come after.   location 19628
Irenaeus Fragments from the Lost Writings, Sec. 55.

{Preface to Genesis}
Call not therefore the faith of Abraham merely blessed because he believed. Do you wish to look upon Abraham with admiration? Then behold how that one man alone professed piety when in the world six hundred had been contaminated with error.   location 19633
Irenaeus Fragments from the Lost Writings, Sec. 55.

{Mt 20:20-21}
And now, in like manner, with regard to that mother of Zebedee's children, do not admire merely what she said, but also the time at which she uttered these words. For when was it that she drew near to the Redeemer? Not after the resurrection, nor after the preaching of His name, nor after the establishment of His kingdom; but it was when the Lord said, "Behold, we go up to Jerusalem, and the Son of man shall be delivered to the chief priests and the scribes; and they shall kill Him, and on the third day He shall rise again."   location 19637
. . .
The Savior was foretelling death; and she asked for the glory of immortality. The Lord was asserting that He must stand arraigned before impious judges; but she, taking no note of that judgment, requested as of the judge: "Grant," she said, "that these my two sons may sit, one on the right hand, and the other on the left, in Thy glory."   location 19643
Irenaeus Fragments from the Lost Writings, Sec. 55.

{Roman Weapons}
after the manner of an engine for shooting missiles. From which circumstance they also call after the scorpion, the warlike implement which, by its being drawn back, gives an impetus to the arrows.
Locations 60039-60040
Tertullian, Scorpiace, ch. 1

{Sign of the Cross}
We have faith for a defence, if we are not smitten with distrust itself also, in immediately making the sign and adjuring, and besmearing the heel with the beast. Finally, we often aid in this way even the heathen, seeing we have been endowed by God with that power which the apostle first used when he despised the viper's bite.
Locations 60043-60046
Tertullian, Scorpiace, ch. 1

{Persecution}
we are in the midst of an intense heat, the very dog-star of persecution,- a state originating doubtless with the dog-headed one himself. Of some Christians the fire, of others the sword, of others the beasts, have made trial; others are hungering in prison for the martyrdoms of which they have had a taste in the meantime by being subjected to clubs and claws besides.
Locations 60067-60069
Tertullian, Scorpiace, ch. 1

{Heretics}
For, in like manner, they also who oppose martyrdoms, representing salvation to be destruction, transmute sweet into bitter, as well as light into darkness;
Location 60075, Locations 60074-60075
Tertullian, Scorpiace, ch. 2

{God's Laws}
He justly avenges the abandonment of the rule which He has wished to be kept; since He would have appointed it to no purpose if He had not wished it kept, and would have to no purpose wished it kept if He had been unwilling to uphold it.
Locations 60126-60128
Tertullian, Scorpiace, ch. 3

{Persecution; Acts 15:28-29}
we ought further to perceive the purport of both the divine threatenings and their fulfilments, which was even then commended not only by the not calling in question, but also by the enduring of martyrdoms, for which certainly He had given occasion by forbidding idolatry.
Locations 60151-60153
Tertullian, Scorpiace, ch. 4

{Persecution; 1 Jn 5:21}
The injunction is given me not to make mention of any other god, not even by speaking,- as little by the tongue as by the hand,- to fashion a god, and not to worship or in any way show reverence to another than Him only who thus commands me, whom I am both bid fear that I may not be forsaken by Him, and love with my whole being, that I may die for Him.
Locations 60163-60165
Tertullian, Scorpiace, ch. 4.

{Persecution; 1 Jn 5:21}
I stoutly maintain that martyrdom is good, as required by the God by whom likewise idolatry is forbidden and punished. For martyrdom strives against and opposes idolatry.
Locations 60174-60175
Tertullian, Scorpiace, ch. 5.

{Pagan Entertainment}
With what good-will the world celebrates those games, the combative festivals and superstitious contests of the Greeks, involving forms both of worship and of pleasure, has now become clear in Africa also.
Locations 60210-60212
Tertullian, Scorpiace, ch. 6

{Persecution}
But to the extent that those persons deal in discoloration, and gore, and swellings, he will design for them crowns, doubtless, and glory, and a present, political privileges, contributions by the citizens, images, statues, and- of such sort as the world can give- an eternity of fame, a resurrection by being kept in remembrance. The pugilist himself does not complain of feeling pain, for he wishes it; the crown closes the wounds,
Locations 60217-60220
Tertullian, Scorpiace, ch. 6

{Medicine, Ancient} For they are many who flee from the aid of a physician also, many in folly, many from fear and false modesty. And the healing art has manifestly an apparent cruelty, by reason of the lancet, and of the burning iron, and of the great heat of the mustard; yet to be cut and burned, and pulled and bitten, is not on that account an evil, for it occasions helpful pains; nor will it be refused merely because it afflicts, but because it afflicts inevitably will it be applied. The good accruing is the apology for the frightfulness of the work. Locations 60181-60185 
Tertullian, Scorpiace, ch. 6  

{Jn 14:2; 1 Cor 15:41; Mt 20:23}
You dictate to God, forsooth, the times, or the ways, or the places in which to institute a trial concerning His own troop (of competitors) as if it were not proper for the Judge to pronounce the preliminary decision also. Well now, if He had put forth faith to suffer martyrdoms not for the contest's sake, but for its own benefit, ought it not to have had some store of hope, for the increase of which it might restrain desire of its own, and check its wish in order that it might strive to mount up, seeing they also who discharge earthly functions are eager for promotion? Or how will there be many mansions in our Father's house, if not to accord with a diversity of deserts? How will one star also differ from another star in glory, unless in virtue of disparity in their rays? But further, if, on that account, some increase of brightness also was appropriate to loftiness of faith, that gain ought to have been of some such sort as would cost great effort, poignant suffering, torture, death. But consider the requital, when flesh and life are paid away-than which in man there is nothing more precious, the one from the hand of God, the other from His breath-that the very things are paid away in obtaining the benefit of which the benefit consists; that the very things are expended which may be acquired; that the same things are the price which are also the commodities. God had foreseen also other weaknesses incident to the condition of man,-the stratagems of the enemy, the deceptive aspects of the creatures, the snares of the world; that faith, even after baptism, would be endangered; that the most, after attaining unto salvation, would be lost again, through soiling the wedding-dress, through failing to provide oil for their torches-would be such as would have to be sought for over mountains and woodlands, and carried back upon the shoulders. He therefore appointed as second supplies of comfort, and the last means of succour, the fight of martyrdom and the baptism-thereafter free from danger-of blood. 
Tertullian, Scorpiace, ch. 6

{Mt 10:33; Lk 12:9; Rev 14:9}
It is evident that to another manner of denial belongs what the Lord has announced concerning it, in terms different from those in which He speaks of confession, when He says, "Who will deny me," not "Who will deny in me." For He had foreseen that this form of violence also would, for the most part, immediately follow when any one had been forced to renounce the Christian name,-that he who had denied that he was a Christian would be compelled to deny Christ Himself too by blaspheming Him. As not long ago, alas, we shuddered at the struggle waged in this way by some with their entire faith, which had had favorable omens. Therefore it will be to no purpose to say, "Though I shall deny that I am a Christian, I shall not be denied by Christ, for I have not denied Himself." For even so much will be inferred from that denial, by which, seeing he denies Christ in him by denying that he is a Christian, he has denied Christ Himself also. But there is more, because He threatens likewise shame with shame (in return): "Whosoever shall be ashamed of me before men, of him will I also be ashamed before my Father who is in heaven." For He was aware that denial is produced even most of all by shame, that the state of the mind appears in the forehead, and that the wound of shame precedes that in the body.  
Tertullian, Scorpiace, ch. 9

{Mt 16:19; Mt 10:33}
For though you think heaven still shut, remember that the Lord left here to Peter and through him to the Church, the keys of it, which everyone who has been here put to the question, and also made confession, will carry with him. ... [The following is said in satire:] I shall send before me fine documents, to be sure, I shall carry with me excellent keys, the fear of them who kill the body only, but do nought against the soul: I shall be graced by the neglect of this command: I shall stand with credit in heavenly places, who could not stand in earthly: I shall hold out against the greater powers, who yielded to the lesser: I shall deserve to be at length let in, though now shut out.
Tertullian, Scorpiace, ch. 10

{Mt 10:22: Mt 24:13; Mk 13:13}
For what does He add after finishing with confession and denial? "Think not that I am come to send peace on earth, but a sword,"-undoubtedly on the earth. "For I am come to set a man at variance against his father, and the daughter against her mother, and the mother-in-law against her daughter-in-law. And a man's foes shall be they of his own household." For so is it brought to pass, that the brother delivers up the brother to death, and the father the son: and the children rise up against the parents, and cause them to die. "And he who endures to the end" let that man be saved. So that this whole course of procedure characteristic of the Lord's sword, which has been sent not to heaven, but to earth, makes confession also to be there, which by enduring to the end is to issue in the suffering of death. 

Tertullian, Scorpiace, ch. 10

{Preface to ECSB}
Who, now, should know better the marrow of the Scriptures than the school of Christ itself?-the persons whom the Lord both chose for Himself as scholars, certainly to be fully instructed in all points, and appointed to us for masters to instruct us in all points. To whom would He have rather made known the veiled import of His own language, than to him to whom He disclosed the likeness of His own glory-to Peter, John, and James, and afterwards to Paul, to whom He granted participation in (the joys of) paradise too, prior to his martyrdom?
Tertullian, Scorpiace, ch. 12

{Jn 3:16; 1 Jn 4:18; Rev 2:10}
John, in fact, exhorts us to lay down our lives even for our brethren,  affirming that there is no fear in love: "For perfect love casts out fear, since fear has punishment; and he who fears is not perfect in love." What fear would it be better to understand (as here meant), than that which gives rise to denial? What love does he assert to be perfect, but that which puts fear to flight, and gives courage to confess? What penalty will he appoint as the punishment of fear, but that which he who denies is about to pay, who has to be slain, body and soul, in hell? And if he teaches that we must die for the brethren, how much more for the Lord,-he being sufficiently prepared, by his own Revelation too, for giving such advice! For indeed the Spirit had sent the injunction to the angel of the church in Smyrna: "Behold, the devil shall cast some of you into prison, that ye may be tried ten days. Be thou faithful unto death, and I will give thee a crown of life."
Tertullian, Scorpiace, ch. 12   

{Rev 2:10; Rev 2:13; Rev 3:10; Mt 20:20-23}
For indeed the Spirit had sent the injunction to the angel of the church in Smyrna: "Behold, the devil shall cast some of you into prison, that ye may be tried ten days. Be thou faithful unto death, and I will give thee a crown of life." Also to the angel of the church in Pergamus (mention was made) of Antipas, the very faithful martyr, who was slain where Satan dwells. Also to the angel of the church in Philadelphia (it was signified) that he who had not denied the name of the Lord was delivered from the last trial. Then to every conqueror the Spirit promises now the tree of life, and exemption from the second death; now the hidden manna with the stone of glistening whiteness, and the name unknown (to every man save him that receives it); now power to rule with a rod of iron, and the brightness of the morning star; now the being clothed in white raiment, and not having the name blotted out of the book of life, and being made in the temple of God a pillar with the inscription on it of the name of God and of the Lord, and of the heavenly Jerusalem; now a sitting with the Lord on His throne,-which once was persistently refused to the sons of Zebedee. Who, pray, are these so blessed conquerors, but martyrs in the strict sense of the word? 
Tertullian, Scorpiace, ch. 12   

{Rev 6:9; Rev 7:14; Isa 1:18; Rev 22:6}
Who, pray, are these so blessed conquerors, but martyrs in the strict sense of the word? For indeed theirs are the victories whose also are the fights; theirs, however, are the fights whose also is the blood. But the souls of the martyrs both peacefully rest in the meantime under the altar, and support their patience by the assured hope of revenge; and, clothed in their robes, wear the dazzling halo of brightness, until others also may fully share in their glory. For yet again a countless throng are revealed, clothed in white and distinguished by palms of victory, celebrating their triumph doubtless over Antichrist, since one of the elders says, "These are they who come out of that great tribulation, and have washed their robes, and made them white in the blood of the Lamb." For the flesh is the clothing of the soul. The uncleanness, indeed, is washed away by baptism, but the stains are changed into dazzling whiteness by martyrdom. For Esaias also promises, that out of red and scarlet there will come forth the whiteness of snow and wool. When great Babylon likewise is represented as drunk with the blood of the saints, doubtless the supplies needful for her drunkenness are furnished by the cups of martyrdoms. 
Tertullian, Scorpiace, ch. 12   

{1 Jn 4:18; Rev 21:8}
When great Babylon likewise is represented as drunk with the blood of the saints, doubtless the supplies needful for her drunkenness are furnished by the cups of martyrdoms. And what suffering the fear of martyrdoms will entail, is in like manner shown. For among all the castaways, nay, taking precedence of them all, are the fearful. "But the fearful," says John-and then come the others-"will have their part in the lake of fire and brimstone." Thus fear, which, as stated in his epistle, love drives out, has punishment.
Tertullian, Scorpiace, ch. 12   

{Gen 25:34; Gen 27:25}
Paul, an apostle, from being a persecutor, who first of all shed the blood of the church, though afterwards he exchanged the sword for the pen, and turned the dagger into a plough, being first a ravening wolf of Benjamin, then himself supplying food. 
Tertullian, Scorpiace, ch. 13   

{Rom 5:3; Rom 8:17; Rom 8:35; 2 Cor 11:23}
As also in his Epistle to the Romans: "And not only so, but we glory in tribulations also, being sure that tribulation works patience, and patience experience, and experience hope; and hope makes not ashamed." And again: "And if children, then heirs, heirs indeed of God, and joint-heirs with Christ: if so be that we suffer with Him, that we may be also glorified together. For I reckon that the sufferings of this time are not worthy to be compared with the glory which shall be revealed in us." And therefore he afterward says: "Who shall separate us from the love of God? Shall tribulation, or distress, or famine, or nakedness, or peril, or sword? (As it is written: For Thy sake we are killed all the day long; we have been counted as sheep for the slaughter.) Nay, in all these things we are more than conquerors, through Him who loved us. For we are persuaded, that neither death, nor life, nor power, nor height, nor depth, nor any other creature, shall be able to separate us from the love of God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord." But further, in recounting his own sufferings to the Corinthians, he certainly decided that suffering must be borne: "In labors, (he says,) more abundant, in prisons very frequent, in deaths oft. Of the Jews five times received I forty stripes, save one; thrice was I beaten with rods; once was I stoned," and the rest. And if these severities will seem to be more grievous than martyrdoms, yet once more he says: "Therefore I take pleasure in infirmities, in reproaches, in necessities, in persecutions, in distresses for Christ's sake." 
Tertullian, Scorpiace, ch. 13   

{2 Tim 4:6; 2 Tim 2:11; 2 Tim 1:7-8; 1 Jn 4:18}
You see what he decides the bliss of martyrdom to be, in honour of which he is providing a festival of mutual joy. When at length he had come to be very near the attainment of his desire, greatly rejoicing in what he saw before him, he writes in these terms to Timothy: "For I am already being offered, and the time of my departure is at hand. I have fought the good fight, I have finished my course, I have kept the faith; there is laid up for me the crown which the Lord will give me on that day"-doubtless of his suffering. Admonition enough did he for his part also give in preceding passages: "It is a faithful saying: For if we are dead with Christ, we shall also live with Him; if we suffer, we shall also reign with Him; if we deny Him, He also will deny us; if we believe not, yet He is faithful: He cannot deny Himself." "Be not thou, therefore, ashamed of the testimony of our Lord, nor of me His prisoner;" for he had said before: "For God hath not given us the spirit of fear, but of power, and of love, and of a sound mind." For we suffer with power from love toward God, and with a sound mind, when we suffer for our blamelessness. But further, if He anywhere enjoins endurance, for what more than for sufferings is He providing it? If anywhere He tears men away from idolatry, what more than martyrdoms takes the lead, in tearing them away to its injury? 
Tertullian, Scorpiace, ch. 13   

{Rom 13:1-6; Mt 22:21; 1 Pet 2:13}
No doubt the apostle admonishes the Romans to be subject to all power, because there is no power but of God, and because (the ruler) does not carry the sword without reason, and is the servant of God, nay also, says he, a revenger to execute wrath upon him that doeth evil. For he had also previously spoken thus: "For rulers are not a terror to a good work, but to an evil. Wilt thou then not be afraid of the power? Do that which is good, and thou shalt have praise of it. Therefore he is a minister of God to thee for good. But if thou do that which is evil, be afraid." Thus he bids you be subject to the powers, not on an opportunity occurring for his avoiding martyrdom, but when he is making an appeal in behalf of a good life, under the view also of their being as it were assistants bestowed upon righteousness, as it were handmaids of the divine court of justice, which even here pronounces sentence beforehand upon the guilty. Then he goes on also to show how he wishes you to be subject to the powers, bidding you pay "tribute to whom tribute is due, custom to whom custom," that is, the things which are Cæsar's to Cæsar, and the things which are God's to God;8322 but man is the property of God alone. Peter,8323 no doubt, had likewise said that the king indeed must be honoured, yet so that the king be honoured only when he keeps to his own sphere, when he is far from assuming divine honours; because both father and mother will be loved along with God, not put on an equality with Him. Besides, one will not be permitted to love even life more than God. 
Tertullian, Scorpiace, ch. 14   

{Jn 21:18; Acts 21:11}
And yet, that the apostles endured such sufferings, we know: the teaching is clear. This I perceive merely in running through the Acts. I am not at all on the search. The prisons there, and the bonds, and the scourges, and the big stones, and the swords, and the onsets by the Jews, and the assemblies of the Gentiles, and the indictments by tribunes, and the hearing of causes by kings, and the judgment-seats of proconsuls and the name of Cæsar, do not need an interpreter. That Peter is struck, that Stephen is overwhelmed by stones, that James is slain as is a victim at the altar, that Paul is beheaded has been written in their own blood. And if a heretic wishes his confidence to rest upon a public record, the archives of the empire will speak, as would the stones of Jerusalem. We read the lives of the Cæsars: At Rome Nero was the first who stained with blood the rising faith. Then is Peter girt by another, when he is made fast to the cross. Then does Paul obtain a birth suited to Roman citizenship, when in Rome he springs to life again ennobled by martyrdom. Wherever I read of these occurrences, so soon as I do so, I learn to suffer; nor does it signify to me which I follow as teachers of martyrdom, whether the declarations or the deaths of the apostles, save that in their deaths I recall their declarations also. For they would not have suffered ought of a kind they had not previously known they had to suffer. When Agabus, making use of corresponding action too, had foretold that bonds awaited Paul, the disciples, weeping and entreating that he would not venture upon going to Jerusalem, entreated in vain. As for him, having a mind to illustrate what he had always taught, he says, "Why weep ye, and grieve my heart? But for my part, I could wish not only to suffer bonds, but also to die at Jerusalem, for the name of my Lord Jesus Christ." 
Tertullian, Scorpiace, ch. 15   

{1 Jn 2:15-16; Rom 12:2; Rom 13:13}
Location 43993
Ye Servants of God, about to draw near to God, that you may make solemn consecration of yourselves to Him, seek well to understand the condition of faith, the reasons of the Truth, the laws of Christian Discipline, which forbid among other sins of the world, the pleasures of the public shows.
Tertullian, The Shows, or De Spectaculis, ch.1

{Rom 13:13; Gal 5:21; 1 Pet 4:3}
Location 43997
To both things, perhaps, some among you are allured by the views of the heathens who in this matter are wont to press us with arguments, such as these: (1) That the exquisite enjoyments of ear and eye we have in things external are not in the least opposed to religion in the mind and conscience; and (2) That surely no offence is offered to God, in any human enjoyment, by any of our pleasures, which it is not sinful to partake of in its own time and place,
Tertullian, The Shows, or De Spectaculis, ch.1

{Col 2:20-23 }
Location 44002
There are some who imagine that Christians, a sort of people ever ready to die, are trained into the abstinence they practise, with no other object than that of making it less difficult to despise life, the fastenings to it being severed as it were.
Tertullian, The Shows, or De Spectaculis, ch.1

{1 Tim 4:4}
Location 44008
Then, again, everyone is ready with the argument that all things, as we teach, were created by God, and given to man for his use, and that they must be good, as coming all from so good a source; but that among them are found the various constituent elements of the public shows, such as the horse, the lion, bodily strength, and musical voice. It cannot, then, be thought that what exists by God's own creative will is either foreign or hostile to Him;
Tertullian, The Shows, or De Spectaculis, ch.2

{2 Tim 3:4}
Location 44015
In fact, you will find not a few whom the imperiling of their pleasures rather than their life holds back from us. For even the weakling has no strong dread of death as a debt he knows is due by him;
Tertullian, The Shows, or De Spectaculis, ch.2

{The nature of Evil}
Location 44025
Why, all sorts of evils, which as indubitably evils even the heathens prohibit, and against which they guard themselves, come from the works of God. Take, for instance, murder, whether committed by iron, by poison, or by magical enchantments. Iron and herbs and demons are all equally creatures of God. Has the Creator, withal, provided these things for man's destruction?
Tertullian, The Shows, or De Spectaculis, ch.2

{Ex 20:13}
Location 44027
Nay, He puts His interdict on every sort of man-killing by that one summary precept, "Thou shalt not kill."
Tertullian, The Shows, or De Spectaculis, ch.2

{Isa 44:9-18}
Location 44028
Moreover, who but God, the Maker of the world, put in its gold, brass, silver, ivory, wood, and all the other materials used in the manufacture of idols? Yet has He done this that men may set up a worship in opposition to Himself?
Tertullian, The Shows, or De Spectaculis, ch.2

{Rom 8:22}
Location 44038
the creature misuses the creation.
Tertullian, The Shows, or De Spectaculis, ch.2

{Rom 3:10-18; Rom 5:10; Jas 4:4}
Location 44039
ought neither to wonder nor to doubt that, as the prowess of the corrupting and God-opposing angel overthrew in the beginning the virtue of man, the work and image of God, the possessor of the world, so he has entirely changed man's nature- created, like his own, for perfect sinlessness- into his own state of wicked enmity against his Maker,
Tertullian, The Shows, or De Spectaculis, ch.2

{Pagan Entertainment; Christian Conscience}
Location 44044
for the faith of some, either too simple or too scrupulous, demands direct authority from Scripture for giving up the shows, and holds out that the matter is a doubtful one, because such abstinence is not clearly and in words imposed upon God's servants.
Tertullian, The Shows, or De Spectaculis, ch.3

{Ps 1:1}
Location 44048
"Blessed," he says, "is the man who has not gone into the assembly of the impious, nor stood in the way of sinners, nor sat in the seat of scorners." Though he seems to have predicted beforehand of that just man, that he took no part in the meetings and deliberations of the Jews, taking counsel about the slaying of our Lord, yet divine Scripture has ever far-reaching applications: after the immediate sense has been exhausted, in all directions it fortifies the practice of the religious life, so that here also you have an utterance which is not far from a plain interdicting of the shows. If he called those few Jews an assembly of the wicked, how much more will he so designate so vast a gathering of heathens! Are the heathens less impious, less sinners, less enemies of Christ, than the Jews were then?
Tertullian, The Shows, or De Spectaculis, ch.3

{Ps 1:1; Pagan Entertainment}
Location 44054
For they call the spaces between the seats going round the amphitheatre, and the passages which separate the people running down, ways. The place in the curve where the matrons sit is called a chair.
Tertullian, The Shows, or De Spectaculis, ch.3

{Unknown}
Location 44057
We may understand a thing as spoken generally, even when it requires a certain special interpretation to be given to it. For some things spoken with a special reference contain in them general truth.
Tertullian, The Shows, or De Spectaculis, ch.3

{Isa 18-20; Rev 11:8}
Location 44059
when He threatens destruction to Egypt and Ethiopia, He surely pre-condemns every sinning nation, whatever. If, reasoning from species to genus, every nation that sins against them is an Egypt and Ethiopia;
Tertullian, The Shows, or De Spectaculis, ch.3

{Titus 3:5-6; Rom 6:3-4}
Location 44062
Lest anyone think that we are dealing in mere argumentative subtleties, I shall turn to that highest authority of our "seal" itself. When entering the water, we make profession of the Christian faith in the words of its rule; we bear public testimony that we have renounced the devil, his pomp, and his angels.
Tertullian, The Shows, or De Spectaculis, ch.4

{Baptism; Eph 5:5-7}
Location 44064
Well, is it not in connection with idolatry, above all, that you have the devil with his pomp and his angels?
Tertullian, The Shows, or De Spectaculis, ch.4

{Pagan Entertainment}
Location 44075
The origin of the games as given by them is this. Timaeus tells us that immigrants from Asia, under the leadership of Tyrrhenus, who, in a contest about his native kingdom, had succumbed to his brother, settled down in Etruria. Well, among other superstitious observances under the name of religion, they set up in their new home public shows. The Romans, at their own request, obtain from them skilled performers- the proper seasons- the name too, for it is said they are called Ludi, from Lydi.
Tertullian, The Shows, or De Spectaculis, ch.5

{Pagan Entertainment}
Location 44078
Varro derives the name of Ludi from Ludus, that is, from play, as they called the Luperci also Ludii, because they ran about making sport; still that sporting of young men belongs, in his view, to festal days and temples, and objects of religious veneration.
Tertullian, The Shows, or De Spectaculis, ch.5

{Pagan Entertainment}
Location 44081
The Liberalia, under the general designation of Ludi, clearly declared the glory of Father Bacchus; for to Bacchus these festivities were first consecrated by grateful peasants,
Tertullian, The Shows, or De Spectaculis, ch.5

{Pagan Entertainment}
Location 44088
Even now, at the first turning-post in the circus, there is a subterranean altar to this same Consus, with an inscription to this effect: "Consus, great in counsel, Mars, in battle mighty tutelar deities." The priests of the state sacrifice at it on the nones of July; the priest of Romulus and the Vestals on the twelfth before the Kalends of September.
Tertullian, The Shows, or De Spectaculis, ch.5

{Pagan Entertainment}
Location 44098
the others have their religious origin in the birthdays and solemnities of kings, in public successes in municipal holidays. There are also testamentary exhibitions, in which funeral honours are rendered to the memories of private persons; and this according to an institution of ancient times. For from the first the "Ludi" were regarded as of two sons, sacred and funereal, that is in honour of the heathen deities and of the dead.
Tertullian, The Shows, or De Spectaculis, ch.6

{Pagan Entertainment}
Location 44107
But the more ambitious preliminary display of the circus games to which the name procession specially belongs, is in itself the proof to whom the whole thing appertains, in the many images the long line of statues, the chariots of all sorts, the thrones, the crowns, the dresses. What high religious rites besides, what sacrifices precede, come between, and follow.
Tertullian, The Shows, or De Spectaculis, ch.7

{Pagan Entertainment}
Location 44110
If these things are done in humbler style in the provinces, in accordance with their inferior means, still all circus games must be counted as belonging to that from which they are derived;
Tertullian, The Shows, or De Spectaculis, ch.7

{Pagan Entertainment; Rom 1:19-23}
Location 44116
the circus is chiefly consecrated to the Sun, whose temple stands in the middle of it, and whose image shines forth from its temple summit; for they have not thought it proper to pay sacred honours underneath a roof to an object they have itself in open space.
Tertullian, The Shows, or De Spectaculis, ch.8

{Pagan Entertainment; Rom 1:19-23}
Location 44121
Every ornament of the circus is a temple by itself. The eggs are regarded as sacred to the Castors,
Tertullian, The Shows, or De Spectaculis, ch.8

{Pagan Entertainment}
Location 44122
The Dolphins vomit forth in honour of Neptune.
Tertullian, The Shows, or De Spectaculis, ch.8

{Pagan Entertainment}
Location 44124
In front of these you have three altars to these three gods- Great, Mighty, Victorious.
Tertullian, The Shows, or De Spectaculis, ch.8

{Pagan Entertainment}
Location 44125
The huge Obelisk, as Hermeteles affirms, is set up in public to the Sun; its inscription, like its origin, belongs to Egyptian superstition.
Tertullian, The Shows, or De Spectaculis, ch.8

{1 Cor. 8:10; Acts 17:16}
Location 44130
What, then, you say; shall I be in danger of pollution if I go to the circus when the games are not being celebrated? There is no law forbidding the mere places to us. For not only the places for show-gatherings, but even the temples, may be entered without any peril of his religion by the servant of God, if he has only some honest reason for it, unconnected with their proper business and official duties. Why, even the streets and the market-place, and the baths, and the taverns, and our very dwelling-places, are not altogether free from idols.
Tertullian, The Shows, or De Spectaculis, ch.8

{Pagan Entertainment}
Location 44148
for at first these were only two, namely white and red,- the former sacred to the winter with its glistening snows, the latter sacred to the summer with its ruddy sun: but afterwards, in the progress of luxury as well as of superstition, red was dedicated by some to Mars, and white by others to the Zephyrs, while green was given to Mother Earth, or spring, and azure to the sky and sea, or autumn.
Tertullian, The Shows, or De Spectaculis, ch.9

{Theater; 1 Pet 4:4}
Location 44158
At first the theatre was properly a temple of Venus; and, to speak briefly, it was owing to this that stage performances were allowed to escape censure, and got a footing in the world. For oftentimes the censors, in the interests of morality, put down above all the rising theatres, foreseeing, as they did, that there was great danger of their leading to a general profligacy;
Tertullian, The Shows, or De Spectaculis, ch.10

{Theater; 1 Pet 4:4; Rom 1:19-23}
Location 44162
Accordingly Pompey the Great, less only than his theatre, when he had erected that citadel of all impurities, fearing some time or other censorian condemnation of his memory, superposed on it a temple of Venus; and summoning by public proclamation the people to its consecration, he called it not a theatre, but a temple, "under which," said he, "we have placed tiers of seats for viewing the shows."
Tertullian, The Shows, or De Spectaculis, ch.10

{Theater; 1 Pet 4:4; Rom 1:19-23}
Location 44169
the performances of the theatre have the common patronage of these two deities. That immodesty of gesture and attire which so specially and peculiarly characterizes the stage are consecrated to them- the one deity wanton by her sex, the other by his drapery; while its services of voice, and song, and lute, and pipe, belong to Apollos, and Muses, and Minervas, and Mercuries. You will hate, O Christian, the things whose authors must be the objects of your utter detestation.
Tertullian, The Shows, or De Spectaculis, ch.10

{Eph 2:1-2; 1 Jn 5:19; 1 Pet 4:4; Rev 12:9}
Location 44177
the demons, predetermining in their own interests from the first, among other evils of idolatry, the pollutions of the public shows, with the object of drawing man away from his Lord and binding him to their own service, carried out their purpose by bestowing on him the artistic gifts which the shows require.
Tertullian, The Shows, or De Spectaculis, ch.10

{Pagan Entertainment; 1 Jn 5:21; 1 Pet 4:4; 1 Cor 10:7,14}
Location 44182
In fulfilment of our plan, let us now go on to consider the combats. Their origin is akin to that of the games (ludi). Hence they are kept as either sacred or funereal, as they have been instituted in honour of the idol-gods of the nations or of the dead. Thus, too, they are called Olympian in honour of Jupiter, known at Rome as the Capitoline; Nemean, in honour of Hercules; Isthmian, in honour of Neptune; the rest mortuarii, as belonging to the dead.
Tertullian, The Shows, or De Spectaculis, ch.11


{Pagan Entertainment; Gladiator Combats}
Location 44191
Note: [Wikipedia] "In ancient Rome, munera (Latin plural) were public works provided for the benefit of the Roman people (populus Romanus) by individuals of high status and wealth. The word munera, singular munus (cf. English "munificence") means "duty, obligation", expressing the individual's responsibility to provide a service or contribution to his community. Munera are owing to the private largesse of an individual, in contrast to the ludi, "games," athletic contests or spectacles sponsored by the state.[1]
The most famous of the munera were the gladiatorial contests, which began as a service or gift rendered to the dead at funeral games."
Tertullian: It remains for us to examine the "spectacle" most noted of all, and in highest favour. It is called a dutiful service (munus), from its being an office, for it bears the name of "officium" as well as "munus." The ancients thought that in this solemnity they rendered offices to the dead;
Tertullian, The Shows, or De Spectaculis, ch.12

{Gladiator Combats; 1 Pet 4:4}
Location 44193
For formerly, in the belief that the souls of the departed were appeased by human blood, they were in the habit of buying captives or slaves of wicked disposition, and immolating them in their funeral obsequies. Afterwards they thought good to throw the veil of pleasure over their iniquity. Those, therefore, whom they had provided for the combat, and then trained in arms as best they could, only that they might learn to die, they, on the funeral day, killed at the places of sepulture.
Tertullian, The Shows, or De Spectaculis, ch.12

{Gladiator Combats; 1 Pet 4:4}
Location 44202
The same remark will apply to the procession of the "Munus," as we look at that in the pomp which is connected with these honours themselves; for the purple robes, the fasces, the fillets, the crowns, the proclamations too, and edicts, the sacred feasts of the day before, are not without the pomp of the devil, without invitation of demons.
Tertullian, The Shows, or De Spectaculis, ch.12

{1 Cor 8:4; Baptism}
Location 44210
we may hold it as a thing beyond all doubt, that for us who have twice renounced all idols, they are utterly unsuitable. "Not that an idol is anything," as the apostle says, "but that the homage they render is to demons."
Tertullian, The Shows, or De Spectaculis, ch.13

{1 Cor 10:19-21; 1 Pet 4:4; Acts 15:20,29}
Location 44214
we do not offer sacrifices to the gods, and we make no funeral oblations to the departed; nay, we do not partake of what is offered either in the one case or the other, for we cannot partake of God's feast and the feast of devils. If, then, we keep throat and belly free from such defilements, how much more do we withhold our nobler parts, our ears and eyes, from the idolatrous and funereal enjoyments, which are not passed through the body,
Tertullian, The Shows, or De Spectaculis, ch.13

{2 Tim 3:4; Phil 3:19; 2 Pet 2:2-3,13-14; 1 Jn 2:15,16}
Location 44222
For as there is a lust of money, or rank, or eating, or impure enjoyment, or glory, so there is also a lust of pleasure.
Tertullian, The Shows, or De Spectaculis, ch.14

{1 Jn 5:19; 1 Jn 2:15-16}
Location 44241
for the world is God's, but the worldly is the devil's.
Tertullian, The Shows, or De Spectaculis, ch.15

{Pagan Entertainment; Circus; 1 Pet 4:4; Rom 13:13}
Location 44243
we are debarred from every kind of spectacle, and especially from the circus, where such excitement presides as in its proper element. See the people coming to it already under strong emotion, already tumultuous, already passion-blind, already agitated about their bets. The praetor is too slow for them: their eyes are ever rolling as though along with the lots in his urn; then they hang all eager on the signal; there is the united shout of a common madness.
Tertullian, The Shows, or De Spectaculis, ch.16

{Pagan Entertainment; Circus; Rom 1:28-31; Titus 3:3}
Location 44248
And the result accordingly is, that they fly into rages, and passions, and discords, and all that they who are consecrated to peace ought never to indulge in. Then there are curses and reproaches,
Tertullian, The Shows, or De Spectaculis, ch.16

{Pagan Entertainment; Circus; 1 Pet 4:4; Rom 13:13}
Location 44255
But what is more merciless than the circus, where people do not spare even their rulers and fellow-citizens? If any of its madnesses are becoming elsewhere in the saints of God, they will be seemly in the circus too; but if they are nowhere right, so neither are they there.
Tertullian, The Shows, or De Spectaculis, ch.16

{Modesty; Theater; Titus 2:12; 1 Tim 3:2; 1 Tim 2:9}
Location 44258
Are we not, in like manner, enjoined to put away from us all immodesty? On this ground, again, we are excluded from the theatre, which is immodesty's own peculiar abode, where nothing is in repute but what elsewhere is disreputable.
Tertullian, The Shows, or De Spectaculis, ch.17


{Theater; Eph 5:3-4, 8-13; Eph 4:29 }
Location 44267
But if we ought to abominate all that is immodest, on what ground is it right to hear what we must not speak? For all licentiousness of speech, nay, every idle word, is condemned by God. Why, in the same way, is it right to look on what it is disgraceful to do?
Tertullian, The Shows, or De Spectaculis, ch.17

{Mt 15:18; Theater}
Location 44269
How is it that the things which defile a man in going out of his mouth, are not regarded as doing so when they go in at his eyes and ears
Tertullian, The Shows, or De Spectaculis, ch.17

{Theater; 1 Pet 4:4; Eph 5:3-4}
Location 44272
If tragedies and comedies are the bloody and wanton, the impious and licentious inventors of crimes and lusts, it is not good even that there should be any calling to remembrance the atrocious or the vile. What you reject in deed, you are not to bid welcome to in word.
Tertullian, The Shows, or De Spectaculis, ch.17

{Boxing; 1 Pet 4:4; 2 Cor 6:17}
Location 44276
things which are done there are not for you to look upon: the blows, and kicks, and cuffs, and all the recklessness of hand, and everything like that disfiguration of the human countenance, which is nothing less than the disfiguration of God's own image.
Tertullian, The Shows, or De Spectaculis, ch.18

{Body Building; 1 Pet 4:4; Rom 1:21-23}
Location 44279
certainly you will not regard with approval those efforts after an artificial body which aim at surpassing the Creator's work;
Tertullian, The Shows, or De Spectaculis, ch.18

{Gladiator Combats; 1 Pet 4:4}
Location 44286
It is good, no doubt, to have the guilty punished. Who but the criminal himself will deny that? And yet the innocent can find no pleasure in another's sufferings: he rather mourns that a brother has sinned so heinously as to need a punishment so dreadful. But who is my guarantee that it is always the guilty who are adjudged to the wild beasts, or to some other doom, and that the guiltless never suffer from the revenge of the judge, or the weakness of the defence, or the pressure of the rack?
Tertullian, The Shows, or De Spectaculis, ch.19

{Gladiator Combats}
Location 44290
At any rate, gladiators not chargeable with crime are offered in sale for the games, that they may become the victims of the public pleasure. Even in the case of those who are judicially condemned to the amphitheatre, what a monstrous thing it is, that, in undergoing their punishment, they, from some less serious delinquency, advance to the criminality of manslayers!
Tertullian, The Shows, or De Spectaculis, ch.19

{Christian Conscience; 1 Pet 4:4; 1 Jn 2:15,16; 2 Pet 2:13-19; Jude 4,18}
Location 44297
How vain, then- nay, how desperate- is the reasoning of persons, who, just because they decline to lose a pleasure, hold out that we cannot point to the specific words or the very place where this abstinence is mentioned, and where the servants of God are directly forbidden to have anything to do with such assemblies!
Tertullian, The Shows, or De Spectaculis, ch.20

{Pagan Entertainment; 1 Pet 4:3}
Location 44311
So it strangely happens, that the same man who can scarcely in public lift up his tunic, even when necessity of nature presses him, takes it off in the circus, as if bent on exposing himself before everybody; the father who carefully protects and guards his virgin daughter's ears from every polluting word, takes her to the theatre himself, exposing her to all its vile words and attitudes; he, again, who in the streets lays hands on or covers with reproaches the brawling pugilist, in the arena gives all encouragement to combats of a much more serious kind;
Tertullian, The Shows, or De Spectaculis, ch.21

{Pagan Entertainment; Gladiator Combats; Eph 5:11; Titus 3:3}
Location 44317
nay, the very man who comes to the show, because he thinks murderers ought to suffer for their crime, drives the unwilling gladiator to the murderous deed with rods and scourges; and one who demands the lion for every manslayer of deeper dye, will have the staff for the savage swordsman, and rewards him with the cap of liberty.
Tertullian, The Shows, or De Spectaculis, ch.21

{Pagan Entertainment; Gladiator Combats; 1 Pet. 4:3,4; Rom 6:20-21; Rom 1:28-31}
Location 44323
Why, the authors and managers of the spectacles, in that very respect with reference to which they highly laud the charioteers, and actors, and wrestlers, and those most loving gladiators, to whom men prostitute their souls, women too their bodies, slight and trample on them, though for their sakes they are guilty of the deeds they reprobate; nay, they doom them to ignominy and the loss of their rights as citizens, excluding them from the Curia, and the rostra, from senatorial and equestrian rank, and from all other honours as well as certain distinctions. What perversity! They have pleasure in those whom yet they punish;
Tertullian, The Shows, or De Spectaculis, ch.22

{Theater; Rom 1:28-31}
Location 44329
Nay, what a confession that the things are evil, when their authors, even in highest favour, are not without a mark of disgrace upon them!
Tertullian, The Shows, or De Spectaculis, ch.22

{Circus; 1 Pet. 4:3,4; Rom 1:18,29-32}
Location 44331
Seeing, then, man's own reflections, even in spite of the sweetness of pleasure, lead him to think that people such as these should be condemned to a hapless lot of infamy, losing all the advantages connected with the possession of the dignities of life, how much more does the divine righteousness inflict punishment on those who give themselves to these arts! Will God have any pleasure in the charioteer who disquiets so many souls,
Tertullian, The Shows, or De Spectaculis, ch.23

{Boxing; Theater; Mt 6:27}
Location 44336
Will He be pleased with him who applies the razor to himself, and completely changes his features; who, with no respect for his face, is not content with making it as like as possible to Saturn and Isis and Bacchus, but gives it quietly over to contumelious blows, as if in mockery of our Lord? The devil, forsooth, makes it part, too, of his teaching, that the cheek is to be meekly offered to the smiter. In the same way, with their high shoes, he has made the tragic actors taller, because "none can add a cubit to his stature."
Tertullian, The Shows, or De Spectaculis, ch.23

{Theater; 1 Pet. 4:3,4; Deut 22:5; Eph 4:25}
Location 44341
Condemning, therefore, as He does hypocrisy in every form, He never will approve any putting on of voice, or sex, or age; He never will approve pretended loves, and wraths, and groans, and tears. Then, too, as in His law it is declared that the man is cursed who attires himself in female garments, what must be His judgment of the pantomime, who is even brought up to play the woman!
Tertullian, The Shows, or De Spectaculis, ch.23

{Gladiator Combats; Pagan Entertainment}
Location 44345
I say nothing of him who, to save himself, thrusts another in the lion's way, that he may not be too little of a murderer when he puts to death that very same man on the arena.
Tertullian, The Shows, or De Spectaculis, ch.23

{Baptism; 1 Pet. 4:3,4; 2 Cor 7:1; Col 3:5-8}
Location 44351
this simply means that in them you have that pomp of the devil which in the "seal" of our faith we abjure. We should have no connection with the things which we abjure,
Tertullian, The Shows, or De Spectaculis, ch.24

{Rom 13:12-13; 1 Pet 4:2-4}
Location 44353
Does it then remain for us to apply to the heathen themselves. Let them tell us, then, whether it is right in Christians to frequent the show. Why, the rejection of these amusements is the chief sign to them that a man has adopted the Christian faith.
Tertullian, The Shows, or De Spectaculis, ch.24

{Pagan Entertainment; Circus; 2 Cor 6:14-18}
Location 44358
Seated where there is nothing of God, will one be thinking of his Maker? Will there be peace in his soul when there is eager strife there for a charioteer?
Tertullian, The Shows, or De Spectaculis, ch.25

{Pagan Entertainment; Theater; 2 Cor 6:14-18}
Location 44363
Amid the measures of the effeminate player, will he call up to himself a psalm? And when the athletes are hard at struggle, will he be ready to proclaim that there must be no striking again?
Tertullian, The Shows, or De Spectaculis, ch.25

{Pagan Entertainment; 2 Cor 6:14-18}
Location 44365
For how monstrous it is to go from God's church to the devil's!
Tertullian, The Shows, or De Spectaculis, ch.25

{Theater; Gladiator Combats; Jas 3:9-12}
Location 44366
to raise your hands to God, and then to weary them in the applause of an actor; out of the mouth, from which you uttered Amen over the Holy Thing, to give witness in a gladiator's favour; to cry "forever" to anyone else but God and Christ!
Tertullian, The Shows, or De Spectaculis, ch.25

{Theater; 1 Thess 5:22; Jas 1:13-16; Acts 16:16}
Location 44369
Why may not those who go into the temptations of the show become accessible also to evil spirits? We have the case of the woman- the Lord Himself is witness- who went to the theatre, and came back possessed.
Tertullian, The Shows, or De Spectaculis, ch.26

{Pagan Entertainment; 1 Pet. 4:3,4; Rom 2:24; Isa 52:5}
Location 44377
if on no other account than that there God's name is blasphemed- that there the cry "To the lions!" is daily raised against us- that from thence persecuting decrees are wont to emanate, and temptations are sent forth. What will you do if you are caught in that heaving tide of impious judgments? Not that there any harm is likely to come to you from men: nobody knows that you are a Christian; but think how it fares with you in heaven.
Tertullian, The Shows, or De Spectaculis, ch.27

{2 Cor 11:14; Entertainment}
Location 44384
Nobody dilutes poison with gall and hellebore: the accursed thing is put into condiments well seasoned and of sweetest taste. So, too, the devil puts into the deadly draught which he prepares, things of God most pleasant and most acceptable.
Tertullian, The Shows, or De Spectaculis, ch.27

{Jn 16:20}
Location 44390
Things in this matter go by their turns. Now they have gladness and we are troubled. "The world," says Jesus, "shall rejoice; ye shall be sorrowful." Let us mourn, then, while the heathen are merry,
Tertullian, The Shows, or De Spectaculis, ch.28

{Col 3:2; 1 Pet 4:2-4}
Location 44392
Thou art too dainty, Christian, if thou wouldst have pleasure in this life as well as in the next; nay, a fool thou art, if thou thinkest this life's pleasures to be really pleasures.
Tertullian, The Shows, or De Spectaculis, ch.28

{Mt 6:21; Lk 12:34}
Location 44396
You have your joys where you have your longings.
Tertullian, The Shows, or De Spectaculis, ch.28

{Rom 6:11; Rom 16:20}
Location 44402
What nobler than to tread underfoot the gods of the nations- to exorcise evil spirits- to perform cures- to seek divine revealings- to live to God? These are the pleasures, these the spectacles that befit Christian men- holy,
Tertullian, The Shows, or De Spectaculis, ch.29

{Mt 26:67-68; Mt 27:27-31, 34}
Location 44426
This is He whom you struck with reed and fist, whom you contemptuously spat upon, to whom you gave gall and vinegar to drink!
Tertullian, The Shows, or De Spectaculis, ch.30

{Persecution; 2 Cor 1:8-9; 2 Tim 3:5-8}
Location 44772
We are not in any great perturbation or alarm about the persecutions we suffer from the ignorance of men; for we have attached ourselves to this sect, fully accepting the terms of its covenant, so that, as men whose very lives are not their own, we engage in these conflicts, our desire being to obtain God's promised rewards, and our dread lest the woes with which He threatens an unchristian life should overtake us.
Tertullian, To Scapula, ch.1

{Mt 5:43-48}
Location 44779
For all love those who love them; it is peculiar to Christians alone to love those that hate them.
Tertullian, To Scapula, ch.1

{1 Cor 10:19-21}
Location 44784
You think that others, too, are gods, whom we know to be devils.
Tertullian, To Scapula, ch.2

{Rom 14:5}
Location 44784
However, it is a fundamental human right, a privilege of nature, that every man should worship according to his own convictions: one man's religion neither harms nor helps another man.
Tertullian, To Scapula, ch.2

{Rom 14:5}
Location 44785
It is assuredly no part of religion to compel religion- to which free-will and not force should lead us- the sacrificial victims even being required of a willing mind. You will render no real service to your gods by compelling us to sacrifice.
Tertullian, To Scapula, ch.2

{1 Pet 2:12; Phil 2:15-16; Mt 5:16; 1 Pet 2:15; 1 Pet 3:16}
Location 44790
you have never detected us- sacrilegious wretches though you reckon us to be- in any theft, far less in any sacrilege. But the robbers of your temples, all of them swear by your gods, and worship them; they are not Christians, and yet it is they who are found guilty of sacrilegious deeds.
Tertullian, To Scapula, ch.2

{1 Tim 2:1; 1 Pet 2:13-14; Rom 13:1-5}
Location 44795
A Christian is enemy to none, least of all to the Emperor of Rome, whom he knows to be appointed by his God, and so cannot but love and honour; and whose well-being moreover, he must needs desire, with that of the empire over which he reigns so long as the world shall stand- for so long as that shall Rome continue.
Tertullian, To Scapula, ch.2

{1 Tim 2:1}
Location 44800
We therefore sacrifice for the emperor's safety, but to our God and his, and after the manner God has enjoined, in simple prayer.
Tertullian, To Scapula, ch.2

{Mk 16:17; Rom 16:20; Eph 6:10-16}
Location 44801
But we not only reject those wicked spirits: we overcome them; we daily hold them up to contempt; we exorcise them from their victims, as multitudes can testify.
Tertullian, To Scapula, ch.2

{Phil 2:15-16; Mt 5:16; Titus 2:11-14}
Location 44804
though our numbers are so great- constituting all but the majority in every city- we conduct ourselves so quietly and modestly; I might perhaps say, known rather as individuals than as organized communities, and remarkable only for the reformation of our former vices.
Tertullian, To Scapula, ch.2

{Persecution; Heb 11:38}
Location 44810
when there had been some agitation about places of sepulture for our dead, and the cry arose, "No area- no burial-grounds for the Christians,"
Tertullian, To Scapula, ch.3

{Rom 1:18; 2 Pet 3:7-12}
Location 44814
All these things are signs of God's impending wrath, which we must needs publish and proclaim in every possible way;
Tertullian, To Scapula, ch.3

{1 Cor 3:16-17; Acts 12:21-23}
Location 44818
We can point you also to the deaths of some provincial rulers, who in their last hours had painful memories of their sin in persecuting the followers of Christ. Vigellius Saturninus, who first here used the sword against us, lost his eyesight. Claudius Lucius Herminianus in Cappadocia, enraged that his wife had become a Christian, had treated the Christians with great cruelty: well, left alone in his palace, suffering under a contagious malady, he boiled out in living worms, and was heard exclaiming, "Let nobody know of it, lest the Christians rejoice, and Christian wives take encouragement." Afterwards he came to see his error in having tempted so many from their stedfastness by the tortures he inflicted, and
Tertullian, To Scapula, ch.3

{1 Cor 3:16-17; Acts 12:21-23}
Location 44824
For you we sincerely wish it may prove to have been a warning only, that, immediately after you had condemned Mavilus of Adrumetum to the wild beasts, you were overtaken by those troubles,
Tertullian, To Scapula, ch.3

{1 Jn 4:18; 2 Cor 5:19-20}
Location 44827
We who are without fear ourselves are not seeking to frighten you, but we would save all men if possible by warning them not to fight with God.
Tertullian, To Scapula, ch.4

{Mt 10:16-18}
Location 44837
Pudens, too, at once dismissed a Christian who was brought before him, perceiving from the indictment that it was a case of vexatious accusation; tearing the document in pieces, he refused so much as to hear him without the presence of his accuser, as not being consistent with the imperial commands.
Tertullian, To Scapula, ch.4

{Mk 9:20-27; Lk 9:42}
Location 44840
The clerk of one of them who was liable to be thrown upon the ground by an evil spirit, was set free from his affliction; as was also the relative of another, and the little boy of a third. How many men of rank (to say nothing of common people) have been delivered from devils, and healed of diseases!
Tertullian, To Scapula, ch.4

{Acts 23:23-24}
Location 44844
Antonine, too, brought up as he was on Christian milk, was intimately acquainted with this man. Both women and men of highest rank, whom Severus knew well to be Christians, were not merely permitted by him to remain uninjured; but he even bore distinguished testimony in their favour, and gave them publicly back to us from the hands of a raging populace.
Tertullian, To Scapula, ch.4

{Jas 5:16-18; 1 Tim 2:1}
Location 44847
Marcus Aurelius also, in his expedition to Germany, by the prayers his Christian soldiers offered to God, got rain in that well-known thirst.
Tertullian, To Scapula, ch.4

{1 Pet 2:12; Heb 13:1-5; 1 Jn 3:17-18}
Location 44849
we never deny the deposit placed in our hands; we never pollute the marriage bed; we deal faithfully with our wards; we give aid to the needy; we render to none evil for evil. As for those who falsely pretend to belong to us, and whom we, too, repudiate, let them answer for themselves. In a word, who has complaint to make against us on other grounds?
Tertullian, To Scapula, ch.4

{Persecution; Mt 10:22}
Location 44855
Nay, even now our people are enduring persecution from the governors of Legio and Mauritania;
Tertullian, To Scapula, ch.4

{Jas 1:12; Jas 5:7-11; 2 Tim 2:12; Rev 2:10}
Location 44857
But the greater our conflicts, the greater our rewards.
Tertullian, To Scapula, ch.4

{1 Pet 4:13-14}
Location 44858
Your cruelty is our glory.
Tertullian, To Scapula, ch.5

{Persecution; Rev 2:10; Phil 2:20-21}
Location 44860
When Arrius Antoninus was driving things hard in Asia, the whole Christians of the province, in one united band, presented themselves before his judgment-seat; on which, ordering a few to be led forth to execution, he said to the rest, "O miserable men, if you wish to die, you have precipices or halters."
Tertullian, To Scapula, ch.5

{Col 1:6}
Location 44862
If we should take it into our heads to do the same thing here, what will you make of so many thousands, of such a multitude of men and women, persons of every sex and every age and every rank, when they present themselves before you?
Tertullian, To Scapula, ch.5

{Acts 17:4}
Location 44864
What will be the anguish of Carthage itself, which you will have to decimate, as each one recognises there his relatives and companions, as he sees there it may be men of your own order, and noble ladies, and all the leading persons of the city, and either kinsmen or friends of those of your own circle?
Tertullian, To Scapula, ch.5

{Mt 10:18-20}
Location 44438
The tribune at once puts the question to him, Why are you so different in your attire? He declared that he had no liberty to wear the crown with the rest. Being urgently asked for his reasons, he answered, I am a Christian. O soldier! boasting thyself in God. Then the case was considered and voted on; the matter was remitted to a higher tribunal; the offender was conducted to the prefects. At once he put away the heavy cloak, his disburdening commenced; he loosed from his foot the military shoe, beginning to stand upon holy ground; he gave up the sword, which was not necessary either for the protection of our Lord; from his hand likewise dropped the laurel crown;
Tertullian, The Chaplet, or De Corona, ch.1

{Mt 10:28-33,38-39}
Location 44446
he, forsooth, alone brave among so many soldier-brethren, he alone a Christian. It is plain that as they have rejected the prophecies of the Holy Spirit, they are also purposing the refusal of martyrdom. So they murmur that a peace so good and long is endangered for them.
Tertullian, The Chaplet, or De Corona, ch.1

{Mt 7:13}
Location 44452
those may be refuted who try to vindicate the sin, especially the laurel-crowned Christians themselves, to whom it is merely a question of debate, as if it might be regarded as either no trespass at all, or at least a doubtful one, because it may be made the subject of investigation.
Tertullian, The Chaplet, or De Corona, ch.1

{Unknown}
Location 44457
the custom about which we are now chiefly inquiring got its authority. But when the question is raised why it is observed, it is meanwhile evident that it is observed. Therefore that can neither be regarded as no offence, or an uncertain one, which is perpetrated against a practice which is capable of defence, on the ground even of its repute, and is sufficiently ratified by the support of general acceptance.
Tertullian, The Chaplet, or De Corona, ch.2

{Regulative Principle}
Location 44467
and I praise the faith which has believed in the duty of complying with the rule, before it has learned the reason of it. An easy thing it is at once to demand where it is written that we should not be crowned. But is it written that we should be crowned?
Tertullian, The Chaplet, or De Corona, ch.2

{Regulative Principle; Supremacy of Scripture}
Location 44473
But "the thing which is not forbidden is freely permitted." I should rather say that what has not been freely allowed is forbidden.
Tertullian, The Chaplet, or De Corona, ch.2

{Apostolic Tradition; 1 Cor 11:1,2;  2 Thess 2:15; 2 Thess 3:6 }
Location 44475
And how long shall we draw the saw to and fro through this line, when we have an ancient practice, which by anticipation has made for us the state, i.e., of the question? If no passage of Scripture has prescribed it, assuredly custom, which without doubt flowed from tradition, has confirmed it. For how can anything come into use, if it has not first been handed down?
Tertullian, The Chaplet, or De Corona, ch.3

{Apostolic Tradition; 1 Cor 11:1,2;  2 Thess 2:15; 2 Thess 3:6}
Location 44477
Even in pleading tradition, written authority, you say, must be demanded. Let us inquire, therefore, whether tradition, unless it be written, should not be admitted. Certainly we shall say that it ought not to be admitted, if no cases of other practices which, without any written instrument, we maintain on the ground of tradition alone, and the countenance thereafter of custom, affords us any precedent.
Tertullian, The Chaplet, or De Corona, ch.3

{Baptism; Apostolic Tradition; 1 Cor 11:1,2 Rom 6:2-3; Titus 3:5}
Location 44480
To deal with this matter briefly, I shall begin with baptism. When we are going to enter the water, but a little before, in the presence of the congregation and under the hand of the president, we solemnly profess that we disown the devil, and his pomp, and his angels. Hereupon we are thrice immersed, making a somewhat ampler pledge than the Lord has appointed in the Gospel. Then when we are taken up (as new-born children), we taste first of all a mixture of milk and honey, and from that day we refrain from the daily bath for a whole week. We take also, in congregations before daybreak, and from the hand of none but the presidents, the sacrament of the Eucharist, which the Lord both commanded to be eaten at meal-times, and enjoined to be taken by all alike.
Tertullian, The Chaplet, or De Corona, ch.3

{Early church; Apostolic Tradition; 1 Cor 11:1,2 Cross}
Location 44485
As often as the anniversary comes round, we make offerings for the dead as birthday honours. We count fasting or kneeling in worship on the Lord's day to be unlawful. We rejoice in the same privilege also from Easter to Whitsunday. We feel pained should any wine or bread, even though our own, be cast upon the ground. At every forward step and movement, at every going in and out, when we put on our clothes and shoes, when we bathe, when we sit at table, when we light the lamps, on couch, on seat, in all the ordinary actions of daily life, we trace upon the forehead the sign.
Tertullian, The Chaplet, or De Corona, ch.3

{Apostolic Tradition; 1 Cor 11:1,2; 2 Thess 2:15; 2 Thess 3:6}
Location 44490
If, for these and other such rules, you insist upon having positive Scripture injunction, you will find none. Tradition will be held forth to you as the originator of them, custom as their strengthener, and faith as their observer.
Tertullian, The Chaplet, or De Corona, ch.4

{Veil; Susanna; 1 Cor 11:2-16}
Location 44494
Among the Jews, so usual is it for their women to have the head veiled, that they may thereby be recognised. I ask in this instance for the law. I put the apostle aside. If Rebecca at once drew down her veil, when in the distance she saw her betrothed, this modesty of a mere private individual could not have made a law, or it will have made it only for those who have the reason which she had. Let virgins alone be veiled, and this when they are coming to be married, and not till they have recognised their destined husband. If Susanna also, who was subjected to unveiling on her trial, furnishes an argument for the veiling of women, I can say here also, the veil was a voluntary thing. She had come accused, ashamed of the disgrace she had brought on herself, properly concealing her beauty, even because now she feared to please.
Tertullian, The Chaplet, or De Corona, ch.4

{Apostolic Tradition; 1 Cor 11:1,2; 2 Thess 2:15; 2 Thess 3:6}
Location 44501
If I nowhere find a law, it follows that tradition has given the fashion in question to custom, to find subsequently (its authorization in) the apostle's sanction, from the true interpretation of reason.
Tertullian, The Chaplet, or De Corona, ch.4

{Apostolic Tradition; 1 Cor 11:1,2; 2 Thess 2:15; 2 Thess 3:6}
Location 44502
This instances, therefore, will make it sufficiently plain that you can vindicate the keeping of even unwritten tradition established by custom; the proper witness for tradition when demonstrated by long-continued observance.
Tertullian, The Chaplet, or De Corona, ch.4

{Apostolic Tradition; 1 Cor 11:1,2;  2 Thess 2:15; 2 Thess 3:6}
Location 44504
But even in civil matters custom is accepted as law, when positive legal enactment is wanting; and it is the same thing whether it depends on writing or on reason, since reason is, in fact, the basis of law.
Tertullian, The Chaplet, or De Corona, ch.4

{Apostolic Tradition ;Phil 3:15; John 16:12}
Location 44509
the apostle also says, "If of anything you are ignorant, God shall reveal it unto you;" he himself, too, being accustomed to afford counsel though he had not the command of the Lord, and to dictate of himself as possessing the Spirit of God who guides into all truth. Therefore his advice has, by the warrant of divine reason, become equivalent to nothing less than a divine command. Earnestly now inquire of this teacher, keeping intact your regard for tradition, from whomsoever it originally sprang; nor have regard to the author, but to the authority, and especially that of custom itself, which on this very account we should revere, that we may not want an interpreter;
Tertullian, The Chaplet, or De Corona, ch.4

{1 Cor 11:14; Rom 2:14-15; Natural Law}
Location 44534
Demanding then a law of God, you have that common one prevailing all over the world, engraven on the natural tables to which the apostle too is wont to appeal, as when in respect of the woman's veil he says, "Does not even Nature teach you?"- as when to the Romans, affirming that the heathen do by nature those things which the law requires, he suggests both natural law and a law-revealing nature.
Tertullian, The Chaplet, or De Corona, ch.6

{Rom 1:26-27; Natural Law}
Location 44537
Yes, and also in the first chapter of the epistle he authenticates nature, when he asserts that males and females changed among themselves the natural use of the creature into that which is unnatural,
Tertullian, The Chaplet, or De Corona, ch.6

{Greek mythology}
Note: In Greek mythology, Pandora (Greek: derived from p??, pan, i.e. "all" and , doron, i.e. "gift", thus "the all-endowed", "the all-gifted" or "the all-giving")[1] was the first human woman created by the gods, specifically by Hephaestus and Athena on the instructions of Zeus. As Hesiod related it, each god helped create her by giving her unique gifts. Zeus ordered Hephaestus to mold her out of earth as part of the punishment of humanity for Prometheus' theft of the secret of fire, and all the gods joined in offering her "seductive gifts". (source)
Location 44556
If there really was a Pandora, whom Hesiod mentions as the first of women,
Tertullian, The Chaplet, or De Corona, ch.7

{Isa 38:21; 1 Tim 5:23; Physicians}
Location 44589
Esaias mentions that he ordered Hezekiah medicine when he was sick. Paul, too, knows that a little wine does the stomach good.
Tertullian, The Chaplet, or De Corona, ch.8

{Jn 13:1-5}
Location 44593
He is girt about with a linen towel- a garment specially sacred to Osiris.
Tertullian, The Chaplet, or De Corona, ch.8

{Isa 5:12}
Location 44612
Thus too Isaiah, as he says, "With timbrels, and psalteries, and flutes they drink wine," would have added "with crowns," if this practice had ever had place in the things of God.
Tertullian, The Chaplet, or De Corona, ch.9

{Ex 20:3; 1 Jn 5:21; 1 Cor 10:7,14; Pagan Customs}
Location 44618
For it is the privilege of the dead also to be thus crowned, as they too straightway become idols, both by their dress and the service of deification, which (deification) is with us a second idolatry.
Tertullian, The Chaplet, or De Corona, ch.10

{Ps 115:4-8; Titus 1:15}
Location 44626
but if he declares that those who make idols will be like them, they already are so who use anything after the style of idol adornings. "To the pure all things are pure: so, likewise, all things to the impure are impure;" but nothing is more impure than idols.
Tertullian, The Chaplet, or De Corona, ch.10

{1 Cor 10:28}
Location 44628
but the ministries to which in their use they are devoted, makes all the difference; for I, too, kill a cock for myself, just as Socrates did for Aesculapius; and if the smell of some place or other offends me, I burn the Arabian product myself, but not with the same ceremony, nor in the same dress, nor with the same pomp, with which it is done to idols. If the creature is defiled by a mere word, as the apostle teaches, "But if anyone say, This is offered in sacrifice to idols, you must not touch it," much more when it is polluted by the dress, and rites, and pomp of what is offered to the gods. Thus the crown also is made out to be an offering to idols; for with this ceremony, and dress, and pomp, it is presented in sacrifice to idols,
Tertullian, The Chaplet, or De Corona, ch.10

{1 Cor 10:14; Acts 15:20,29}
Location 44635
Wherefore the apostle exclaims, "Flee idolatry:" certainly idolatry whole and entire he means. Reflect on what a thicket it is, and how many thorns lie hid in it. Nothing must be given to an idol, and so nothing must be taken from one.
Tertullian, The Chaplet, or De Corona, ch.10

{2 Cor 6:15; 1 Cor 10:14; Acts 15:20,29}
Location 44636
If it is inconsistent with faith to recline in an idol temple, what is it to appear in an idol dress? What communion have Christ and Belial? Therefore flee from it;
Tertullian, The Chaplet, or De Corona, ch.10

{War; Mt 22:39}
Location 44650
I think we must first inquire whether warfare is proper at all for Christians. What sense is there in discussing the merely accidental, when that on which it rests is to be condemned? Do we believe it lawful for a human oath to be superadded to one divine, for a man to come under promise to another master after Christ, and to abjure father, mother, and all nearest kinsfolk, whom even the law has commanded us to honour and love next to God Himself, to whom the gospel, too, holding them only of less account than Christ, has in like manner rendered honour?
Tertullian, The Chaplet, or De Corona, ch.11

{War; Mt 26:52; 1 Cor 6:7; 1 Pet 2:19-20; 1 Pet 3:9-17}
Location 44654
Shall it be held lawful to make an occupation of the sword, when the Lord proclaims that he who uses the sword shall perish by the sword? And shall the son of peace take part in the battle when it does not become him even to sue at law? And shall he apply the chain, and the prison, and the torture, and the punishment, who is not the avenger even of his own wrongs? Shall he, forsooth, either keep watch-service for others more than for Christ, or shall he do it on the Lord's day, when he does not even do it for Christ Himself?
Tertullian, The Chaplet, or De Corona, ch.11

{1 Cor 8:10; Military Guards}
Location 44658
And shall he keep guard before the temples which he has renounced? And shall he take a meal where the apostle has forbidden him? And shall he diligently protect by night those whom in the day-time he has put to flight by his exorcisms, leaning and resting on the spear the while with which Christ's side was pierced?
Tertullian, The Chaplet, or De Corona, ch.11

{Jn 18:36; Military Guards}
Location 44660
Shall he carry a flag, too, hostile to Christ? And shall he ask a watchword from the emperor who has already received one from God?
Tertullian, The Chaplet, or De Corona, ch.11

{War; Lk 3:14; Mt 8:5-13}
Location 44663
Then how many other offences there are involved in the performances of camp offices, which we must hold to involve a transgression of God's law, you may see by a slight survey. The very carrying of the name over from the camp of light to the camp of darkness is a violation of it. Of course, if faith comes later, and finds any preoccupied with military service, their case is different, as in the instance of those whom John used to receive for baptism, and of those most faithful centurions, I mean the centurion whom Christ approves, and the centurion whom Peter instructs; yet, at the same time, when a man has become a believer, and faith has been sealed, there must be either an immediate abandonment of it, which has been the course with many; or all sorts of quibbling will have to be resorted to in order to avoid offending God, and that is not allowed even outside of military service; or, last of all, for God the fate must be endured which a citizen-faith has been no less ready to accept.
Tertullian, The Chaplet, or De Corona, ch.11

{1 Jn 3:6, 8-9; 1 Jn 5:18; 1 Cor 15:34}
Location 44673
A state of faith admits no plea of necessity; they are under no necessity to sin, whose one necessity is, that they do not sin.
Tertullian, The Chaplet, or De Corona, ch.11

{Rev 2:10}
Location 44675
there is a higher necessity to dread denying and to undergo martyrdom, than to escape from suffering, and to render the homage required.
Tertullian, The Chaplet, or De Corona, ch.11

{Greek mythology}
Location 44687
When military service again is crowned with olive, the idolatry has respect to Minerva, who is equally the goddess of arms- but got a crown of the tree referred to, because of the peace she made with Neptune.
Tertullian, The Chaplet, or De Corona, ch.12

{War}
Location 44697
Is the laurel of the triumph made of leaves, or of corpses? Is it adorned with ribbons, or with tombs? Is it bedewed with ointments, or with the tears of wives and mothers? It may be of some Christians too; for Christ is also among the barbarians.
Tertullian, The Chaplet, or De Corona, ch.12

{Ancient Customs}
Location 44703
For state reasons, the various orders of the citizens also are crowned with laurel crowns; but the magistrates besides with golden ones, as at Athens, and at Rome.
Tertullian, The Chaplet, or De Corona, ch.13

{Rev 14:8; Rev 16:19; Rev 17:5; Rev 18:2,10; 1 Pet 5:13}
Location 44711
From so much as a dwelling in that Babylon of John's Revelation we are called away; much more then from its pomp.
Tertullian, The Chaplet, or De Corona, ch.13

{Jn 16:20; Apostolic Tradition; 1 Cor 11:1,2}
Location 44715
You have your own registers, your own calendar; you have nothing to do with the joys of the world; nay, you are called to the very opposite, for "the world shall rejoice, but ye shall mourn."
Tertullian, The Chaplet, or De Corona, ch.13

{1 Cor 7:39; Rev 17:1-5}
Location 44717
Marriage, too, decks the bridegroom with its crown; and therefore we will not have heathen brides, lest they seduce us even to the idolatry with which among them marriage is initiated.
Tertullian, The Chaplet, or De Corona, ch.13

{1 Pet 1:18-19; 1 Tim 2:6; Roman Customs}
Location 44719
You have a crowning also on the making of a freeman; but you have been already ransomed by Christ, and that at a great price.
Tertullian, The Chaplet, or De Corona, ch.13

{1 Jn 5:21}
Location 44734
But indeed a Christian will not even dishonour his own gate with laurel crowns, if so be he knows how many gods the devil has attached to
Tertullian, The Chaplet, or De Corona, ch.13

{1 Cor 11:3-10}
Location 44738
since Christ is the Head of the Christian man-( for his head) is as free as even Christ is, under no obligation to wear a covering, not to say a band. But even the head which is bound to have the veil, I mean woman's, as already taken possession of by this very thing, is not open also to a band. She has the burden of her own humility to bear. If she ought not to appear with her head uncovered on account of the angels, much more with a crown on it will she offend those who perhaps are then wearing crowns above. For what is a crown on the head of a woman, but beauty made seductive, but mark of utter wantonness,
Tertullian, The Chaplet, or De Corona, ch.14

{Mt 27:29; Mk 15:17; Jn 19:2; 1 Cor 11:3-10}
Location 44743
What sort of garland, however, I pray you, did He who is the Head of the man and the glory of the woman, Christ Jesus, the Husband of the church, submit to in behalf of both sexes? Of thorns, I think, and thistles,- a figure of the sins which the soil of the flesh brought forth for us, but which the power of the cross removed,
Tertullian, The Chaplet, or De Corona, ch.14

{Rev 2:10; Jas 1:22}
Location 44754
Keep for God His own property untainted; He will crown it if He choose. Nay, then, He does even choose. He calls us to it. To him who conquers He says, "I will give a crown of life."
Tertullian, The Chaplet, or De Corona, ch.15

{Mithras}
Location 44763
Blush, ye fellow-soldiers of his, henceforth not to be condemned even by him, but by some soldier of Mithras, who, at his initiation in the gloomy cavern, in the camp, it may well be said, of darkness, when at the sword's point a crown is presented to him, as though in mimicry of martyrdom, and thereupon put upon his head, is admonished to resist and cast it off, and, if you like, transfer it to his shoulder, saying that Mithras is his crown.
Tertullian, The Chaplet, or De Corona, ch.15

{1 Cor 11:5,6,10,13}
Having already undergone the trouble peculiar to my opinion, I will show in Latin also that it behoves our virgins to be veiled from the time that they have passed the turning-point of their age:    location 64286  
Tertullian, On the Veiling of Virgins, ch.1

{Apostle's Creed; 1 Cor 15:3-4}
as whatever is matter of acknowledgment received. The rule of faith, indeed, is altogether one, alone immoveable and irreformable; the rule, to wit, of believing in one only God omnipotent, the Creator of the universe, and His Son Jesus Christ, born of the Virgin Mary, crucified under Pontius Pilate, raised again the third day from the dead, received in the heavens, sitting now at the right (hand) of the Father, destined to come to judge quick and dead through the resurrection of the flesh as well (as of the spirit).    location 64294 
Tertullian, On the Veiling of Virgins, ch.1

{1 Cor 11:5, 6, 10, 13; Eph 4:4-5}
But I will not, meantime, attribute this usage to Truth. Be it, for a while, custom: that to custom I may likewise oppose custom. Throughout Greece, and certain of its barbaric provinces, the majority of Churches keep their virgins covered. There are places, too, beneath this (African) sky, where this practice obtains; lest any ascribe the custom to Greek or barbarian Gentilehood. But I have proposed (as models) those Churches which were founded by apostles or apostolic men; and antecedently, I think, to certain (founders, who shall be nameless). Those Churches therefore, as well (as others), have the self-same authority of custom (to appeal to); in opposing phalanx they range "times" and "teachers," more than these later (Churches do). What shall we observe? What shall we choose? We cannot contemptuously reject a custom which we cannot condemn, inasmuch as it is not "strange," since it is not among "strangers" that we find it, but among those, to wit, with whom we share the law of peace and the name of brotherhood. They and we have one faith, one God, the same Christ, the same hope, the same baptismal sacraments; let me say it once for all, we are one Church. Thus, whatever belongs to our brethren is ours: only, the body divides us.    location 64316
Tertullian, On the Veiling of Virgins, ch.2
 
{2 Pet 2:14}
For that custom which belies virgins while it exhibits them, would never have been approved by any except by some men who must have been similar in character to the virgins themselves. 

{2 Pet 2:14}
Such eyes will wish that a virgin be seen as has the virgin who shall wish to be seen.    location 64329  
Tertullian, On the Veiling of Virgins, ch.2

{Gal 5:13; 1 Cor 7:7; Mt 19:12}
Still, until very recently, among us, either custom was, with comparative indifference, admitted to communion. The matter had been left to choice, for each virgin to veil herself or expose herself, as she might have chosen, just as (she had equal liberty) as to marrying, which itself withal is neither enforced nor prohibited.    location 64335  
Tertullian, On the Veiling of Virgins, ch.3

{Modesty; 1 Cor 14:35}
The virgins of men go about, in opposition to the virgins of God, with front quite bare, excited to a rash audacity; and the semblance of virgins is exhibited by women who have the power of asking somewhat from husbands,    location 64340
Tertullian, On the Veiling of Virgins, ch.3
  
{Modesty; Lk 17:1-2; 1 Thess 4:6}
"We are scandalized," they say, "because others walk otherwise (than we do);" and they prefer being "scandalized" to being provoked (to modesty). A "scandal," if I mistake not, is an example not of a good thing, but of a bad, tending to sinful edification. Good things scandalize none but an evil mind.    location 64343 
Tertullian, On the Veiling of Virgins, ch.3

{Modesty}
For what if the incontinent withal say they are "scandalized" by the continent? Is continence to be recalled?    location 64346  
Tertullian, On the Veiling of Virgins, ch.3

{Modesty; 1 Tim 2:9}
Are therefore chaste virgins to be, for the sake of these marketable creatures, dragged into the church, blushing at being recognised in public, quaking at being unveiled, as if they had been invited as it were to rape? For they are no less unwilling to suffer even this. Every public exposure of an honourable virgin is (to her) a suffering of rape: and yet the suffering of carnal violence is the less (evil), because it comes of natural office. But when the very spirit itself is violated in a virgin by the abstraction of her covering, she has learnt to lose what she used to keep. O sacrilegious hands, which have had the hardihood to drag off a dress dedicated to God! What worse could any persecutor have done, if he had known that this (garb) had been chosen by a virgin? You have denuded a maiden in regard of her head,    location 64348 
Tertullian, On the Veiling of Virgins, ch.3
 
{1 Cor 11:5,6,10,13; 1 Cor 8:34,36-38}
there is immediately urged against us the fact that "no mention of virgins is made by the apostle where he is prescribing about the veil, but that women' only are named; whereas, if he had willed virgins as well to be covered, he would have pronounced concerning virgins' also together with the women' named; just as," says (our opponent), "in that passage where he is treating of marriage, he declares likewise with regard to virgins' what observance is to be followed."    location 64359  
Tertullian, On the Veiling of Virgins, ch.4

{1 Cor 11:5,6,10,13}
But we withal retort the self-same line of argument. For he who knew elsewhere how to make mention of each sex-of virgin I mean, and woman, that is, not-virgin-for distinction's sake; in these (passages), in which he does not name a virgin, points out (by not making the distinction) community of condition. Otherwise he could here also have marked the difference between virgin and woman, just as elsewhere    location 64364  
Tertullian, On the Veiling of Virgins, ch.4

{1 Cor 11:5,6,10,13}
Of the natural word, the general word is woman. Of the general, again, the special is virgin, or wife, or widow, or whatever other names, even of the successive stages of life, are added hereto. Subject, therefore, the special is to the general    location 64382  
Tertullian, On the Veiling of Virgins, ch.4

{Gen 2:23}
When this kind of second human being was made by God for man's assistance, that female was forthwith named woman; still happy, still worthy of paradise, still virgin. "She shall be called," said (Adam), "Woman." And accordingly you have the name,-I say, not already common to a virgin, but-proper (to her; a name) which from the beginning was allotted to a virgin.    location 64393  
Tertullian, On the Veiling of Virgins, ch.5

{Gen 2:23}
our fashion of calling our wives our women, however improperly withal we may in some instances speak. For the Greeks, too, who use the name of woman more (than we do) in the sense of wife, have other names appropriate to wife. But I prefer to assign this usage as a testimony to Scripture.    location 64409  
Tertullian, On the Veiling of Virgins, ch.5
64431  

{Gal 4:4}
Let us now see whether the apostle withal observes the norm of this name in accordance with Genesis, attributing it to the sex; calling the virgin Mary a woman, just as Genesis (does) Eve. For, writing to the Galatians, "God," he says, "sent His own Son, made of a woman," who, of course, is admitted to have been a virgin,    location 64432  
Tertullian, On the Veiling of Virgins, ch.6

{Lk 1:26-27}
I recognise, too, the angel Gabriel as having been sent to "a virgin." But when he is blessing her, it is "among women," not among virgins, that he ranks her:    location 64434  
Tertullian, On the Veiling of Virgins, ch.6

{1 Cor 11:3}
If "the man is head of the woman," of course (he is) of the virgin too, from whom comes the woman who has married;    location 64454  
Tertullian, On the Veiling of Virgins, ch.7

{1 Cor 11:5}
If "it is shameful for a woman to be shaven or shorn," of course it is so for a virgin.    location 64455  
Tertullian, On the Veiling of Virgins, ch.7

{1 Cor 11:7-10}
If "the woman is the glory of the man," how much more the virgin, who is a glory withal to herself! If "the woman is of the man," and "for the sake of the man," that rib of Adam was first a virgin. If "the woman ought to have power upon the head," all the more justly ought the virgin, to whom pertains the essence of the cause (assigned for this assertion). For if (it is) on account of the angels-those, to wit, whom we read of as having fallen from God and heaven on account of concupiscence after females-who can presume that it was bodies already defiled, and relics of human lust, which such angels yearned after, so as not rather to have been inflamed for virgins, whose bloom pleads an excuse for human lust likewise?    location 64457  
Tertullian, On the Veiling of Virgins, ch.7

{1 Cor 11:14-15}
If, moreover, the apostle further adds the prejudgment of "nature," that redundancy of locks is an honour to a woman, because hair serves for a covering, of course it is most of all to a virgin that this is a distinction; for their very adornment properly consists in this, that, by being massed together upon the crown, it wholly covers the very citadel of the head with an encirclement of hair.    location 64473  
Tertullian, On the Veiling of Virgins, ch.7

{1 Cor 11:3, 4,7,14}
The contraries, at all events, of all these (considerations) effect that a man is not to cover his head: to wit, because he has not by nature been gifted with excess of hair; because to be shaven or shorn is not shameful to him; because it was not on his account that the angels transgressed; because his Head is Christ.    location 64478  
Tertullian, On the Veiling of Virgins, ch.8

{1 Cor 11:3-15}
On either side the apostle has made his sentence apply with sufficient plainness to the universal species of each sex;    location 64484  
Tertullian, On the Veiling of Virgins, ch.8

{1 Cor 11:4}
two laws, mutually distinctive; on the one hand (a law) of veiling, on the other (a law) of baring. Therefore, if the fact that it is said "every man" makes it plain that the name of man is common even to him who is not yet a man, a stripling male;    location 64488  
Tertullian, On the Veiling of Virgins, ch.8

{1 Cor 11:3-15}
As virgins are not compelled to be veiled, so let boys not be bidden to be unveiled.    location 64494  
Tertullian, On the Veiling of Virgins, ch.8

{1 Cor 11:16}
"If any," he says, "is contentious, we have not such a custom, nor (has) the Church of God." He shows that there had been some contention about this point;    location 64496  
Tertullian, On the Veiling of Virgins, ch.8

{1 Cor 11:16}
So, too, did the Corinthians themselves understand him. In fact, at this day the Corinthians do veil their virgins. What the apostles taught, their disciples approve.    location 64499 
Tertullian, On the Veiling of Virgins, ch.8

{1 Cor 14:34-35; 1 Tim 2:12; 1 Tim 3:2}
It is not permitted to a woman to speak in the church; but neither (is it permitted her) to teach, nor to baptize, nor to offer, nor to claim to herself a lot in any manly function, not to say (in any) sacerdotal office. Let us inquire whether any of these be lawful to a virgin.    location 64504
 Tertullian, On the Veiling of Virgins, ch.9

 {1 Tim 2:9}
Is the reason why it is granted her to dispense with the veil, that she may be notable and marked as she enters the church? that she may display the honour of sanctity in the liberty of her head?    location 64509  
Tertullian, On the Veiling of Virgins, ch.9

{Early church}
know plainly, that in a certain place a virgin of less than twenty years of age has been placed in the order of widows!    location 64511  
Tertullian, On the Veiling of Virgins, ch.9

{Early church; 1 Tim 5:9}
But the authority which licenses her sitting in that seat uncovered is the same which allows her to sit there as a virgin: a seat to which (besides the "sixty years" not merely "single-husbanded" (women)-that is, married women-are at length elected, but "mothers" to boot, yes, and "educators of children;" in order, forsooth, that their experimental training in all the affections may, on the one hand, have rendered them capable of readily aiding all others with counsel and comfort, and that, on the other, they may none the less have travelled down the whole course of probation whereby a female can be tested.    location 64515  
Tertullian, On the Veiling of Virgins, ch.9

{Mt 19:12; Rev 14:4}
so many men-virgins, so many voluntary eunuchs, should carry their glory in secret, carrying no token to make them, too, illustrious.    location 64524  
Tertullian, On the Veiling of Virgins, ch.10

{Gal 5:23-24}
that males should have been honoured on the ground of continency itself likewise. The more their sex is eager and warm toward females, so much the more toil does the continence of (this) greater ardour involve; and therefore the worthier is it of all ostentation, if ostentation of virginity is dignity.    location 64528
Tertullian, On the Veiling of Virgins, ch.10
  
{1 Cor 11:5}
when we joined issue about the apostle's absolute definition, that " every woman" must be understood (as meaning woman) of even every age, it might be replied by the opposite side, that in that case it behoved the virgin to be veiled from her nativity, and from the first entry of her age (upon the roll of time).    location 64538  
Tertullian, On the Veiling of Virgins, ch.11

{Gen 2:17,25; Gen 3:7,10,11}
But it is not so; but from the time when she begins to be self-conscious, and to awake to the sense of her own nature, and to emerge from the virgin's (sense), and to experience that novel (sensation) which belongs to the succeeding age. For withal the founders of the race, Adam and Eve, so long as they were without intelligence, went "naked;" but after they tasted of "the tree of recognition," they were first sensible of nothing more than of their cause for shame. Thus they each marked their intelligence of their own sex by a covering.    location 64541  
Tertullian, On the Veiling of Virgins, ch.11

{1 Cor 11:10; Gen 6:1-2; Deut 22:13-21}
But even if it is "on account of the angels" that she is to be veiled, doubtless the age from which the law of the veil will come into operation will be that from which "the daughters of men" were able to invite concupiscence of their persons, and to experience marriage. For a virgin ceases to be a virgin from the time that it becomes possible for her not to be one. And accordingly, among Israel, it is unlawful to deliver one to a husband except after the attestation by blood of her maturity;    location 64545  
Tertullian, On the Veiling of Virgins, ch.11

{Gen 24:64-65}
when she is perceived to be ripe; and, as not-virgin, is now subject to the law, just as she is to marriage. And the betrothed indeed have the example of Rebecca, who, when she was being conducted-herself still unknown-to an unknown betrothed, as soon as she learned that he whom she had sighted from afar was the man, awaited not the grasp of the hand, nor the meeting of the kiss, nor the interchange of salutation; but confessing what she had felt-namely, that she had been (already) wedded in spirit-denied herself to be a virgin by then and there veiling herself.    location 64549  
Tertullian, On the Veiling of Virgins, ch.11

{1 Cor 11:5, 6,10, 13}
Behold that virgin-daughter of yours already wedded-her soul by expectancy, her flesh by transformation-for whom you are preparing a second husband! Already her voice is changed, her limbs fully formed, her "shame" everywhere clothing itself, the months paying their tributes; and do you deny her to be a woman whom you assert to be undergoing womanly experiences?    location 64557  
Tertullian, On the Veiling of Virgins, ch.11

{Ancient world}
Nay, but even among the heathens (the betrothed) are led veiled to the husband.    location 64561  
Tertullian, On the Veiling of Virgins, ch.11

{Ancient world}
For their females they despatch to their businesses from (the age of) twelve years, but the male from two years later; decreeing puberty (to consist) in years, not in espousals or nuptials. "Housewife" one is called, albeit a virgin, and "house-father," albeit a stripling.    location 64565  
Tertullian, On the Veiling of Virgins, ch.11

{1 Pet 3:3}
Such is, then, the honesty of age, that there is no overpowering it even by garb. What of the fact that these (virgins) of ours confess their change of age even by their garb; and, as soon as they have understood themselves to be women, withdraw themselves from virgins, laying aside (beginning with their head itself) their former selves: dye their hair; and fasten their hair with more wanton pin; professing manifest womanhood with their hair parted from the front. The next thing is, they consult the looking-glass to aid their beauty,    location 64574 
 Tertullian, On the Veiling of Virgins, ch.12

{1 Pet 3:3}
fit tightly the multiform shoe, carry down more ample appliances to the baths.    location 64579  
Tertullian, On the Veiling of Virgins, ch.12

{1 Cor 11:5,6,10,13}
and as they veil their head in presence of heathens, let them at all events in the church conceal their virginity, which they do veil outside the church. They fear strangers: let them stand in awe of the brethren too; or else let them have the consistent hardihood to appear as virgins in the streets as well, as they have the hardihood to do in the churches.    location 64583  
Tertullian, On the Veiling of Virgins, ch.13

{1 Cor 11:7,15}
"And how shall we invite the other (virgins) to similar conduct?" Forsooth, it is their numbers that will make us happy, and not the grace of God and the merits of each individual! Is it virgins who (adorn or commend) the Church in the sight of God, or the Church which adorns or commends virgins? (Our objector) has therefore confessed that "glory" lies at the root of the matter.    location 64600  
Tertullian, On the Veiling of Virgins, ch.14

{1 Cor 8:34; 1 Pet 1:15-16}
Nay, but true and absolute and pure virginity fears nothing more than itself.    location 64624  
Tertullian, On the Veiling of Virgins, ch.15

{1 Cor 11:5, 6,10, 13, 15}
It betakes itself for refuge to the veil of the head as to a helmet, as to a shield, to protect its glory against the blows of temptations, against the dam of scandals,    location 64625  
Tertullian, On the Veiling of Virgins, ch.15

{1 Tim 2:9}
For who will have the audacity to intrude with his eyes upon a shrouded face? a face without feeling?    location 64632  
Tertullian, On the Veiling of Virgins, ch.15

{2 Cor 11:2}
And yet you do not belie yourself in appearing as a bride. For wedded you are to Christ: to Him you have surrendered your flesh; to Him you have espoused your maturity.    location 64648  
Tertullian, On the Veiling of Virgins, ch.16

{1 Cor 11:5, 6,10,13}
not to outgrow so far the discipline of the veil, not even in a moment of an hour, as, because you cannot refuse it, to take some other means to nullify it, by going neither covered nor bare. For some, with their turbans and woollen bands, do not veil their head, but bind it up; protected, indeed, in front, but, where the head properly lies, bare. Others are to a certain extent covered over the region of the brain with linen coifs of small dimensions-I suppose for fear of pressing the head-and not reaching quite to the ears.    location 64653  
Tertullian, On the Veiling of Virgins, ch.17

{1 Cor 11:5,6,10,13,15}
Let them know that the whole head constitutes "the woman." Its limits and boundaries reach as far as the place where the robe begins. The region of the veil is co-extensive with the space covered by the hair when unbound; in order that the necks too may be encircled.    location 64657  
Tertullian, On the Veiling of Virgins, ch.17

{Ancient world}
Arabia's heathen females will be your judges, who cover not only the head, but the face also, so entirely, that they are content, with one eye free, to enjoy rather half the light than to prostitute the entire face. A female would rather see than be seen.    location 64660  
Tertullian, On the Veiling of Virgins, ch.17

{1 Cor 11:5,6,10,13,15}
severe a chastisement will they likewise deserve, who, amid (the recital of) the Psalms, and at any mention of (the name of) God, continue uncovered; (who) even when about to spend time in prayer itself, with the utmost readiness place a fringe, or a tuft, or any thread whatever, on the crown of their heads, and suppose themselves to be covered? Of so small extent do they falsely imagine their head to be! Others, who think the palm of their hand plainly greater than any fringe or thread, misuse their head no less;    location 64667
Tertullian, On the Veiling of Virgins, ch.17

{Eph 4:19; Rom 1:21-25}
Location 60736
they know not how to shun the hurricane which is impending over the world.
Tertullian, On Repentance, ch.1

{Rom 3:18; Ps 36:1; Jer 2:19; Jer 44:10; Prov 1:29}
Location 60746
But where there is no fear, in like manner there is no amendment;
Tertullian, On Repentance, ch.2

{Eph 1:10; Mt 23:37}
Location 60750
so He gathered together a people for Himself,
Tertullian, On Repentance, ch.2

{Ps 2:9; Rev 2:27; Ps 1:3;Jer 17:8; Mt 3:10}
Location 60816
vessel," may thenceforward become that "tree which is sown beside the waters, is perennial in leaves, bears fruit at its own time," and shall not see "fire," nor "axe."
Tertullian, On Repentance, ch.4

{Heb 10:26-29}
Location 60830
repentance which, being shown us and commanded us through God's grace, recalls us to grace with the Lord, when once learned and undertaken by us ought never afterward to be cancelled by repetition of sin.
Tertullian, On Repentance, ch.5

{Gen 4:5; Jude 11; Rom 1:21}
Location 60839
he rejects the Giver in abandoning the gift; he denies the Benefactor in not honouring the benefit. How can he be pleasing to Him, whose gift is displeasing to himself? Thus he is shown to be not only contumacious toward the Lord, but likewise ungrateful.
Tertullian, On Repentance, ch.5

{Heb 13:4}
Location 60847
But some say that "God is satisfied if He be looked up to with the heart and the mind, even if this be not done in outward act, and that thus they sin without damage to their fear and their faith:" that is, that they violate wedlock without damage to their chastity; they mingle poison for their parent without damage to their filial duty!
Tertullian, On Repentance, ch.5

{Rom 6:1,2,15}
Location 60861
Moreover, a presumptuous confidence in baptism introduces all kind of vicious delay and equivocation with regard to repentance; for, feeling sure of undoubted pardon of their sins, men meanwhile steal the intervening time, and make it for themselves into a holiday-time for sinning, rather than a time for learning not to sin. Further, how inconsistent is it to expect pardon of sins (to be granted) to a repentance which they have not fulfilled! This is to hold out your hand for merchandise, but not produce the price. For repentance is the price at which the Lord has determined to award pardon:
Tertullian, On Repentance, ch.6

{Ps 51:17; 2 Cor 7:10-11}
Location 60866
sellers first examine the coin with which they make their bargains, to see whether it be cut, or scraped, or adulterated,
Tertullian, On Repentance, ch.6

{Lk 3:8; Lk 19:8; 2 Cor 7:10-11}
Location 60869
our amendment should be manifested) while, pardon being in abeyance, there is still a prospect of penalty;
Tertullian, On Repentance, ch.6

{2 Pet 2:18-22}
Location 60870
For what slave, after his position has been changed by reception of freedom, charges himself with his (past) thefts and desertions?
Tertullian, On Repentance, ch.6

{Eternal Security; Heb 10:26-29; Heb 6:4-8; 1 Cor 10:5-6,12; Gal 5:4}
Location 60880
For do not many afterward fall out of (grace)? is not this gift taken away from many?
Tertullian, On Repentance, ch.6

{2 Pet 2:18-19}
Location 60883
But what difference does your "knowing" Him make, while you rest in the same practises as in days bygone, when you knew Him not?
Tertullian, On Repentance, ch.6

{Titus 3:5; Acts 2:38}
Location 60886
That baptismal washing is a sealing of faith, which faith is begun and is commended by the faith of repentance. We are not washed in order that we may cease sinning, but because we have ceased, since in heart we have been bathed already. For
Tertullian, On Repentance, ch.6

{Baptism; Rom 6:3-4}
Location 60894
so it is becoming that learners desire baptism, but do not hastily receive it: for he who desires it, honours it; he who hastily receives it, disdains it:
Tertullian, On Repentance, ch.6

{Baptism}
Location 60896
the former takes, the latter usurps it.
Tertullian, On Repentance, ch.6

{Rev 3:19; Rev 2:5}
Location 60908
Let no one be less good because God is more so, by repeating his sin as often as he is forgiven. Otherwise be sure he will find an end of escaping, when he shall not find one of sinning.
Tertullian, On Repentance, ch.7

{Eph 4:22-24; Col 3:8-10; Gal 5:24; Rom 6:19}
Location 60910
Men in general, after escaping shipwreck, thenceforward declare divorce with ship and sea; and by cherishing the memory of the danger, honour the benefit conferred by God,- their deliverance, namely.
Tertullian, On Repentance, ch.7

{Rev 3:19; Ps 4:4}
Location 60927
Let it by all means be irksome to sin again, but let not to repent again be irksome: irksome to imperil one's self again, but not to be again set free. Let none be ashamed. Repeated sickness must have repeated medicine. You will show your gratitude to the Lord by not refusing what the Lord offers you. You have offended, but can still be reconciled.
Tertullian, On Repentance, ch.7

{Hos 6:6; Mt 9:13; Jer 8:4 [LXX]; Lk 15:7,10}
Location 60936
clemency. Saith He not, "He who hath fallen shall rise again, and he who hath been averted shall be converted?" He it is, indeed, who "would have mercy rather than sacrifices." The heavens, and the angels who are there, are glad at a man's repentance. Ho! you sinner, be of good cheer! you see where it is that there is joy at your return. What meaning for us have those
Tertullian, On Repentance, ch.8

{Lk 15:18,19}
Location 60946
but only if you heartily repent- if you compare your own hunger with the plenty of your Father's "hired servants"- if you leave behind you the swine, that unclean herd- if you again seek your Father, offended though He be, saying, "I have sinned, nor am worthy any longer to be called Thine."
Tertullian, On Repentance, ch.8

{Jas 5:16; Mt 3:6}
Etymology
From (exomologéo, "confess") +? (-sis).(source)
Strong's Greek 1843. exomologeó
HELPS Word-studies 1843 eksomologeo (from 1537 /ek, "wholly out from," intensifying 3670/homologeo, "say the same thing about") - properly, fully agree and to acknowledge that agreement openly (whole-heartedly); hence, to confess("openly declare"), without reservation (no holding back).
 Matthew 3:6 V-PPM-NMP

NAS: River, as they confessed their sins.
KJV: in Jordan, confessing their sins.
INT: by him confessing the sins

James 5:16 V-PMM-2P

NAS: Therefore, confess your sins to one
KJV: Confess [your] faults one to another,
INT: Confess therefore to one another

Location 60953
be carried out in some (external) act. This act, which is more usually expressed and commonly spoken of under a Greek name, is exomologesis
Tertullian, On Repentance, ch.9

{Jas 5:16; Job 42:6; 1 Kings 21:27; 1 Chr 21:16; Jon 3:5-9}
Location 60956
With regard also to the very dress and food, it commands (the penitent) to lie in sackcloth and ashes, to cover his body in mourning, to lay his spirit low in sorrows, to exchange for severe treatment the sins which he has committed; moreover, to know no food and drink but such as is plain,- not for the stomach's sake, to wit, but the soul's; for the most part, however, to feed prayers on fastings, to groan, to weep and make outcries unto the Lord your God; to bow before the feet of the presbyters, and kneel to God's dear ones; to enjoin on all the brethren to be ambassadors to bear his deprecatory supplication (before God).
Tertullian, On Repentance, ch.9

{Rev 3:19; Eph 5:11-13}
Location 60966
Yet most men either shun this work, as being a public exposure of themselves, or else defer it from day to day. I presume (as being) more mindful of modesty than of salvation;
Tertullian, On Repentance, ch.10

{Eph 4:4,5,16}
Location 60973
among brethren and fellow-servants, where there is common hope, fear, joy, grief, suffering, because there is a common Spirit from a common Lord and Father, why do you think these brothers to be anything other than yourself?
Tertullian, On Repentance, ch.10

{1 Cor 12:26; Rom 12:15}
Location 60975
The body cannot feel gladness at the trouble of any one member, it must necessarily join with one consent in the grief,
Tertullian, On Repentance, ch.10

{1 Cor 12:26-27; Jas 5:16; Gal 6:1-2}
Location 60976
When, then, you cast yourself at the brethren's knees, you are handling Christ, you are entreating Christ. In like manner, when they shed tears over you, it is Christ who suffers,
Tertullian, On Repentance, ch.10

{Jas 5:16; 1 Jn 1:9}
Location 60980
Is it better to be damned in secret than absolved in public?
Tertullian, On Repentance, ch.10

{Isa 1:18}
Location 60987
Is it then becoming for us to supplicate for our sins in scarlet and purple?
Tertullian, On Repentance, ch.11

{Ancient life}
Location 60988
the powder for polishing the teeth, and some forked implement of steel or brass for cleaning the nails.
Tertullian, On Repentance, ch.11

{Repentance}
Location 60990
let him enlarge his expenses; let him carefully seek the rarest delicacy of fatted fowls; let him refine his old wine: and when any shall ask him, "On whom are you lavishing all this?" let him say, "I have sinned against God, and am in peril of eternally perishing: and so now I am drooping, and wasting and torturing myself, that I may reconcile God to myself,
Tertullian, On Repentance, ch.11

{Civil office}
Location 60993
they who go about canvassing for the obtaining of civil office, feel it neither degrading nor irksome to struggle, in behalf of such their desires,
Tertullian, On Repentance, ch.11

{Civil office; Phil 3:20}
Location 60996
all that for the sake of the fleeting joy of a single year! Do we hesitate, when eternity is at stake, to endure what the competitor for consulship or praetorship puts up with?
Tertullian, On Repentance, ch.11

{Isa 5:18}
Location 60999
Such are they of whom Scripture makes mention: "Woe to them who bind their own sins as it were with a long rope."
Tertullian, On Repentance, ch.11

{Heb 12:29; Rev 20:14,15}
Location 61005
fire; and- which proves to us the perpetuity of the judgment- though they start asunder, though they be devoured, yet come they never to an end.
Tertullian, On Repentance, ch.12


{Dan 4:31-33}
Location 61011
Shall the sinner, knowing that exomologesis has been instituted by the Lord for his restoration, pass that by which restored the Babylonian king to his realms? Long time had he offered to the Lord his repentance, working out his exomologesis by a seven years' squalor, with his nails wildly growing after the eagle's fashion, and his unkempt hair wearing the shagginess of a lion. Hard handling! Him whom men were shuddering at, God was receiving back.
Tertullian, On Repentance, ch.12

{Titus 2:11-12; Eph 4:22-24; Col 3:10}
whatever had been in bygone days, has either been quite changed, as circumcision; or else supplemented, as the rest of the Law; or else fulfilled, as Prophecy; or else perfected, as faith itself. For the new grace of God has renewed all things from carnal unto spiritual,
Locations 61349-61351
Tertullian, On Prayer, ch.1

{Jn 3:31-32; Mt 6:6-7; Jer 23:24}
Therefore, after what form of words John taught to pray is not extant, because earthly things have given place to heavenly. "He who is from the earth," says John, "speaketh earthly things; and He who is here from the heavens speaketh those things which He hath seen." And what is the Lord Christ's- as this method of praying is- that is not heavenly? And so, blessed brethren, let us consider His heavenly wisdom: first, touching the precept of praying secretly, whereby He exacted man's faith, that he should be confident that the sight and hearing of Almighty God are present beneath roofs, and extend even into the secret place; and required modesty in faith, that it should offer its religious homage to Him alone, whom it believed to see and to hear everywhere. Further, since wisdom succeeded in the following precept, let it in like manner appertain unto faith, and the modesty of faith, that we think not that the Lord must be approached with a train of words, who, we are certain, takes unsolicited foresight for His own. And yet that very brevity- and let this make for the third grade of wisdom- is supported on the substance of a great and blessed interpretation, and is as diffuse in meaning as it is compressed in words. For it has embraced not only the special duties of prayer, be it veneration of God or petition for man, but almost every discourse of the Lord, every record of His Discipline; so that, in fact, in the Prayer is comprised an epitome of the whole Gospel. 
Locations 61356-61367
Tertullian, On Prayer, ch.1

{Mt 6:9; Jn 1:12; Mt 23:9; Isa 1:2; Jn 10:30}
The prayer begins with a testimony to God, and with the reward of faith, when we say, "Our Father who art in the heavens;" for (in so saying), we at once pray to God, and commend faith, whose reward this appellation is. It is written, "To them who believed on Him He gave power to be called sons of God." However, our Lord very frequently proclaimed God as a Father to us; nay, even gave a precept "that we call no one on earth father, but the Father whom we have in the heavens:" and so, in thus praying, we are likewise obeying the precept. Happy they who recognize their Father! This is the reproach that is brought against Israel, to which the Spirit attests heaven and earth, saying, "I have begotten sons, and they have not recognized me." Moreover, in saying "Father," we also call Him "God." That appellation is one both of filial duty and of power. Again, in the Father the Son is invoked; "for I," saith He, "and the Father are One." Nor is even our mother the Church passed by,
Locations 61368-61374
Tertullian, On Prayer, ch.2

{Ex 3:13-16; Jn 5:43; Jn 12:28; Jn 17:6; Ps 103:22; Isa 6:3; Rev 4:8; Isa 30:18; 1 Tim 2:1; Mt 5:44}
The name of "God the Father" had been published to none. Even Moses, who had interrogated Him on that very point, had heard a different name. To us it has been revealed in the Son, for the Son is now the Father's new name. "I am come," saith He, "in the Father's name;" and again, "Father, glorify Thy name;" and more openly, "I have manifested Thy name to men." That name, therefore, we pray may "be hallowed." Not that it is becoming for men to wish God well, as if there were any other by whom He may be wished well, or as if He would suffer unless we do so wish. Plainly, it is universally becoming for God to be blessed in every place and time, on account of the memory of His benefits ever due from every man. But this petition also serves the turn of a blessing. Otherwise, when is the name of God not "holy," and "hallowed" through Himself, seeing that of Himself He sanctifies all others- He to whom that surrounding circle of angels cease not to say, "Holy, holy, holy?" In likewise, therefore, we too, candidates for angelhood, if we succeed in deserving it, begin even here on earth to learn by heart that strain hereafter to be raised unto God, and the function of future glory. So far, for the glory of God. On the other hand, for our own petition, when we say, "Hallowed be Thy name," we pray this; that it may be hallowed in us who are in Him, as well in all others for whom the grace of God is still waiting; that we may obey this precept, too, in "praying for all," even for our personal enemies.
Locations 61383-61388
Locations 61377-61383
Tertullian, On Prayer, ch.3

{Mt 6:10}
According to this model, we subjoin, "Thy will be done in the heavens and on the earth;" not that there is some power withstanding to prevent God's will being done, and we pray for Him the successful achievement of His will; but we pray for His will to be done in all. For, by figurative interpretation of flesh and spirit, we are "heaven" and "earth;" albeit, even if it is to be understood simply, still the sense of the petition is the same, that in us God's will be done on earth, to make it possible, namely, for it to be done also in the heavens. What, moreover, does God will, but that we should walk according to His Discipline?
Locations 61389-61395
Tertullian, On Prayer, ch.4


{Mt 6:10; Prov 21:1}
"Thy kingdom come" has also reference to that whereto "Thy will be done" refers- in us, that is. For when does God not reign, in whose hand is the heart of all kings? 
Locations 61404-61406
Tertullian, On Prayer, ch.5

{2 Pet 3:9-14}
how do some pray for some protraction of the age, when the kingdom of God, which we pray may arrive, tends unto the consummation of the age?
Locations 61408-61409
Tertullian, On Prayer, ch.5

{2 Pet 3:10; Rev 22:7??}
Thy kingdom come with all speed,-
Location 61412
Tertullian, On Prayer, ch.5

{Mt 6:33; Jn 6:35; Jn 6:33; Mt 26:26; Mt 6:32; Mt 15:26; Mk 7:27; Mt 7:9; Lk 11:11;Lk 11:5-9;Mt 6:34; Lk 12:29}
But how gracefully has the Divine Wisdom arranged the order of the prayer; so that after things heavenly- that is, after the "Name" of God, the "Will" of God, and the "Kingdom" of God- it should give earthly necessities also room for a petition! For the Lord had already issued His edict, "Seek ye first the kingdom, and then even these shall be added." However, we may rather understand, "Give us this day our daily bread," spiritually. For Christ is our Bread; because Christ is Life, and bread is life. "I am," saith He, "the Bread of Life;" and, a little above, "The Bread is the Word of the living God, who came down from the heavens." Then we find, too, that His body is reckoned in bread: "This is my body." And so, in petitioning for "daily bread," we ask for perpetuity in Christ, and indivisibility from His body. But, because that word is admissible in a carnal sense too, it cannot be so used without the religious remembrance withal of spiritual Discipline; for (the Lord) commands that bread be prayed for, which is the only food necessary for believers; for "all other things the nations seek after." The like lesson He both inculcates by examples, and repeatedly handles in parables, when He says, "Doth a father take away bread from his children, and hand it to dogs?" and again, "Doth a father give his son a stone when he asks for bread?" For He thus shows what it is that sons expect from their father. Nay, even that nocturnal knocker knocked for "bread." Moreover, He justly added, "Give us this day," seeing He had previously said, "Take no careful thought about the morrow, what ye are to eat."
Locations 61414-61426
Tertullian, On Prayer, ch.6

{Ex 18:23,32; Ex 33:11;Mt 18:21-35;Lk 6:37;Mt 18:21-22; Gen 4:15,24}
The Lord knew Himself to be the only guiltless One, and so He teaches that we beg "to have our debts remitted us." A petition for pardon is a full confession; because he who begs for pardon fully admits his guilt. Thus, too, penitence is demonstrated acceptable to God who desires it rather than the death of the sinner. Moreover, debt is, in the Scriptures, a figure of guilt; because it is equally due to the sentence of judgment, and is exacted by it: nor does it evade the justice of exaction, unless the exaction be remitted, just as the lord remitted to that slave in the parable his debt; for hither does the scope of the whole parable tend. For the fact withal, that the same servant, after liberated by his lord, does not equally spare his own debtor; and, being on that account impeached before his lord, is made over to the tormentor to pay the uttermost farthing- that is, every guilt, however small: corresponds with our profession that "we also remit to our debtors;" indeed elsewhere, too, in conformity with this Form of Prayer, He saith, "Remit, and it shall be remitted you." And when Peter had put the question whether remission were to be granted to a brother seven times, "Nay," saith He, "seventy-seven times;" in order to remould the Law for the better; because in Genesis vengeance was assigned "seven times" in the case of Cain, but in that of Lamech "seventy-seven times." 
Locations 61430-61441
Tertullian, On Prayer, ch.6

{Mt 6:13; Jas 1:13}
guilt-" Lead us not into temptation:" that is, suffer us not to be led into it, by him (of course) who tempts; but far be the thought that the Lord should seem to tempt, as if He either were ignorant of the faith of any, or else were eager to overthrow it. Infirmity and malice are characteristics of the devil. For God 
Locations 61442-61444
Tertullian, On Prayer, ch.8

{Gen 22:1-13; Mt 10:37; Lk 14:26; Deut 13:6-10; Deut 33:9; Mt 4:10; Lk 4:8; Lk 22:40; Mt 26:41; Mk 14:31}
had commanded even Abraham to make a sacrifice of his son, for the sake not of tempting, but proving, his faith; in order through him to make an example for that precept of His, whereby He was, by and by, to enjoin that he should hold no pledges of affection dearer than God. He Himself, when tempted by the devil, demonstrated who it is that presides over and is the originator of temptation. This passage He confirms by subsequent ones, saying, "Pray that ye be not tempted;" yet they were tempted, (as they showed) by deserting their Lord, because they had given way rather to sleep than prayer. The final clause, therefore, is consonant, and interprets the sense of "Lead us not into temptation;" for this sense is, "But convey us away from the Evil One." 
Tertullian, On Prayer, ch.8

{Unknown}
In summaries of so few words, how many utterances of the prophets, the Gospels, the apostles- how many discourses, examples, parables of the Lord, are touched on! How many duties are simultaneously discharged! 
Locations 61444-61452
Tertullian, On Prayer, ch.9

{Rom 8:26; Jn 14:26}
God alone could teach how he wished Himself prayed to.
Location 61455
Tertullian, On Prayer, ch.9

Chapter X We May Superadd Prayers of Our Own to the Lord's Prayer 

{Mt 6:8; Mt 7:7; Lk 11:9}
Since, however, the Lord, the Foreseer of human necessities, said separately, after delivering His Rule of Prayer, "Ask, and ye shall receive;" and since there are petitions which are made according to the circumstances of each individual; our additional wants have the right- after beginning with the legitimate and customary prayers as a foundation, as it were- of rearing an outer superstructure of petitions, yet with remembrance of the Master's precepts. 
Tertullian, On Prayer, ch.10

Chapter XI When Praying the Father, You are Not to Be Angry with a Brother 

{Mt 5:22,23; Heb 13:10}
That we may not be as far from the ears of God as we are from His precepts, the memory of His precepts paves for our prayers a way unto heaven; of which precepts the chief is, that we go not up unto God's altar before we compose whatever of discord or offence we have contracted with our brethren.
Locations 61458-61465
Tertullian, On Prayer, ch.11

{Acts 9:2; Acts 19:9,23; Mt 5:17; Mt 5:21-22; 1 Pet 3:9}
(for elsewhere our Discipline is called "the Way" ), that when, set in "the way" of prayer, we go not unto "the Father" with anger. After that, the Lord, "amplifying the Law," openly adds the prohibition of anger against a brother to that of murder. Not even by an evil word does He permit it to be vented.
Locations 61468-61470
Tertullian, On Prayer, ch.11

Chapter 12

Chapter XIII Of Washing the Hands 

{Mk 7:1-23; Mt 15:1-20; 1 Tim 2:8; Mt 23:25,26; Mt 27:24}
But what reason is there in going to prayer with hands indeed washed, but the spirit foul?- inasmuch as to our hands themselves spiritual purities are necessary, that they may be "lifted up pure" from falsehood, from murder, from cruelty, from poisonings, from idolatry, and all the other blemishes which, conceived by the spirit, are effected by the operation of the hands. These are the true purities; not those which most are superstitiously careful about, taking water at every prayer, even when they are coming from a bath of the whole body. When I was scrupulously making a thorough investigation of this practice, and searching into the reason of it, I ascertained it to be a commemorative act, bearing on the surrender of our Lord. We, however, pray to the Lord: we do not surrender Him; nay, we ought even to set ourselves in opposition to the example of His surrenderer, and not, on that account, wash our hands.
Locations 61477-61484
Tertullian, On Prayer, ch.13

Chapter XIV

{Early church}
We, however, not only raise, but even expand them; and, taking our model from the Lord's passion even in prayer we confess to Christ.
Locations 61489-61491
Tertullian, On Prayer, ch.14

Chapter XV Of Putting Off Cloaks

{1 Cor 11:3-16}
the reproach of vanity may deservedly be laid; if, that is, they are observed without the authority of any precept either of the Lord, or else of the apostles. For matters of this kind belong not to religion, but to superstition, being studied, and forced, and of curious rather than rational ceremony; deserving of restraint, at all events, even on this ground, that they put us on a level with Gentiles. As, e.g., it is the custom of some to make prayer with cloaks doffed, for so do the nations approach their idols;
Locations 61493-61496
Tertullian, On Prayer, ch.15

Chapter XVI Of Sitting After Prayer 

{Early church}
*Vol. II. p. 18 (Vision V.) (source)
Again, for the custom which some have of sitting when prayer is ended, I perceive no reason, except that which children give. For what if that Hermas*, whose writing is generally inscribed with the title The Shepherd, had, after finishing his prayer, not sat down on his bed, but done some other thing:
Locations 61499-61502
Tertullian, On Prayer, ch.16

{Tob 12:12; Lk 1:11; Rev 8:3-4}
If, on the one hand, it is irreverent to sit under the eye, and over against the eye, of him whom you most of all revere and venerate; how much more, on the other hand, is that deed most irreligious under the eye of the living God, while the angel of prayer is still standing by unless we are upbraiding God that prayer has wearied us! 
Tertullian, On Prayer, ch.16

Chapter XVII Of Elevated Hands 

{Lk 18:9-14; 1 Tim 2:8}
But we more commend our prayers to God when we pray with modesty and humility, with not even our hands too loftily elevated, but elevated temperately and becomingly; and not even our countenance over-boldly uplifted. For that publican who prayed with humility and dejection not merely in his supplication, but in his countenance too, went his way "more justified" than the shameless Pharisee. The sounds of our voice, likewise, should be subdued;
Locations 61512-61514
Locations 61507-61512
Tertullian, On Prayer, ch.16

{Mt 6:5-6}
What superior advantage will they who pray too loudly gain, except that they annoy their neighbours? Nay, by making their petitions audible, what less error do they commit than if they were to pray in public? 
Tertullian, On Prayer, ch.16

Chapter XVIII Of the Kiss of Peace 

{Acts 13:2; Acts 14:23; Ex 34:28; Lk 2:37; Joel 2:12; Esth 4:16; Neh 1:4; Rom 16:16; 1 Cor 16:20; 2 Cor 8:12; 1 Thess 5:26; 1 Pet 5:14}
Another custom has now become prevalent. Such as are fasting withhold the kiss of peace, which is the seal of prayer, after prayer made with brethren. But when is peace more to be concluded with brethren than when, at the time of some religious observance,
Locations 61518-61522
Tertullian, On Prayer, ch.18

{Mt 6:16-18; Rom 16:16; 1 Cor 16:20; 2 Cor 8:12; 1 Thess 5:26; 1 Pet 5:14}
What prayer is complete if divorced from the "holy kiss?" Whom does peace impede when rendering service to his Lord? What kind of sacrifice is that from which men depart without peace? Whatever our prayer be, it will not be better than the observance of the precept by which we are bidden to conceal our fasts; for now, by abstinence from the kiss, we are known to be fasting.
Locations 61524-61526
Tertullian, On Prayer, ch.18

{Mt 6:16-18}
So, too, on the day of the passover, when the religious observance of a fast is general, and as it were public, we justly forego the kiss, caring nothing to conceal anything which we do in common with all. 
Tertullian, On Prayer, ch.18

Chapter XIX Of Stations 


{2 Tim 2:1}
* The word Statio seems to have been used in more than one sense in the ancient Church. A passage in the Shepherd of Hermas, referred to above (B. iii. Sim. 5), appears to make it ="fast."(source)
Similarly, too, touching the days of Stations*, most think that they must not be present at the sacrificial prayers, on the ground that the Station must be dissolved by reception of the Lord's Body. Does, then, the Eucharist cancel a service devoted to God, or bind it more to God? Will not your Station be more solemn if you have withal stood at God's altar? When the Lord's Body has been received and reserved each point is secured, both the participation of the sacrifice and the discharge of duty. If the "Station" has received its name from the example of military life- for we withal are God's military- of course no gladness or sadness chanting to the camp abolishes the "stations" of the soldiers: for gladness will carry out discipline more willingly, sadness more carefully. 
Locations 61529-61538
Tertullian, On Prayer, ch.19

Chapter XX Of Women's Dress

{2 Tim 2:9-10; 1 Pet 3:1-6}
Touching modesty of dress and ornamentation, indeed, the prescription of Peter likewise is plain, checking as he does with the same mouth, because with the same Spirit, as Paul, the glory of garments, and the pride of gold, and the meretricious elaboration of the hair. 
Tertullian, On Prayer, ch.20

Chapter XXI Of Virgins 

{1 Cor 11:5}
But that point which is promiscuously observed throughout the churches, whether virgins ought to be veiled or no, must be treated of. For they who allow to virgins immunity from head-covering, appear to rest on this; that the apostle has not defined "virgins" by name, but "women," as "to be veiled;" nor the sex generally, so as to say "females," but a class of the sex, by saying "women:" for if he had named the sex by saying "females," he would have made his limit absolute for every woman; but while he names one class of the sex, he separates another class by being silent. For, they say, he might either have named "virgins" specially; or generally, by a compendious term, "females." 
Tertullian, On Prayer, ch.21

Chapter XXII Answer to the Foregoing Arguments

{1 Cor 11:5; Gen 2:23 [LXX]; 1 Cor 7:34}
meaning of "woman" from the very first records of the sacred writings. Here they find it to be the name of the sex, not a class of the sex: if, that is, God gave to Eve, when she had not yet known a man, the surname "woman" and "female"-(" female," whereby the sex generally; "woman," hereby a class of the sex, is marked). So, since at that time the as yet unwedded Eve was called by the word "woman," that word has been made common even to a virgin. Nor is it wonderful that the apostle- guided, of course, by the same Spirit by whom, as all the divine Scripture, so that book Genesis, was drawn up- has used the selfsame word in writing "women,"
Kindle Locations 61552-61555
Kindle Locations 61550-61552
Locations 61540-61549
Tertullian, On Prayer, ch.22

*1 Strong's Greek 1135 guné (????) , 217 Occurrences (source)
*2 Strong's Greek 2338 thélus(?????), 5 Occurrences (source)
understood. What of the fact that in the Greek speech, in which the apostle wrote his letters, it is usual to say, "women" rather than "females;" that is, gunaikas (gunaikas)*1 rather than theleias (theleias)*2?
Locations 61560-61561
Tertullian, On Prayer, ch.22

{1 Cor 11:10; Gen 6:2 [LXX]}
*For a similar use of the word "virgin," see Rev. xiv. 4. (source)
Equally in each sex let the younger age follow the discipline of the elder; or else let the male "virgins,*" too, be veiled, if the female virgins withal are not veiled, because they are not mentioned by name. Let "man" and "youth" be different, if "woman" and "virgin" are different. For indeed it is "on account of the angels" that he saith women must be veiled, because on account of "the daughters of men" angels revolted from God.
Locations 61567-61570
Tertullian, On Prayer, ch.22

{1 Cor 11:10; Gen 6:2[LXX]}
Who then, would contend that "women" alone- that is, such as were already wedded and had lost their virginity- were the objects of angelic concupiscence, unless "virgins" are incapable of excelling in beauty and finding lovers?
Locations 61570-61572
Tertullian, On Prayer, ch.22

{1 Cor 11:14}
Again, while he says that "nature herself," which has assigned hair as a tegument and ornament to women, "teaches that veiling is the duty of females," has not the same tegument and the same honour of the head been assigned also to virgins?
Locations 61576-61578
Tertullian, On Prayer, ch.22

{Gen 3:6; Gen 2:27; Gen 3:7,10,11}
for from the first a virgin was named "female." This custom, in short, even Israel observes; but if Israel did not observe it, our Law, amplified and supplemented, would vindicate the addition for itself; let it be excused for imposing the veil on virgins also. Under our dispensation, let that age which is ignorant of its sex retain the privilege of simplicity. For both Eve and Adam, when it befell them to be "wise," forthwith veiled what they had learnt to know. At all events, with regard to those in whom girlhood has changed (into maturity), their age ought to remember its duties as to nature, so also, to discipline; for they are being transferred to the rank of "women" both in their persons and in their functions.
Locations 61580-61585
Tertullian, On Prayer, ch.22

{1 Cor 11:5}
Why do you denude before God what you cover before men? Will you be more modest in public than in the church?
Locations 61589-61590
Tertullian, On Prayer, ch.22

{2 Cor 11:2}
If you are a virgin, shrink from (the gaze of) many eyes. Let no one wonder at your face; let no one perceive your falsehood. You do well in falsely assuming the married character, if you veil your head; nay, you do not seem to assume it falsely, for you are wedded to Christ: to Him you have surrendered your body; act as becomes your Husband's discipline. If He bids the brides of others to be veiled, His own, of course, much more.
Locations 61593-61596
Tertullian, On Prayer, ch.22

{Gen 24:64-65}
And Rebecca is example enough for us, who, when her betrothed had been pointed out, veiled herself for marriage merely on recognition of him. 
Locations 61602-61604
Tertullian, On Prayer, ch.22

Chapter XXIII Of Kneeling 

{Rom 14:11; Ps 95:6; 2 Chr 7:3; 2 Chr 29:29; Phil 2:9-11; Mk 5:6; Isa 45:23; Eph 4:27; Eph 6:18; 1 Thess 5:17; 1 Tim 2:8}
In the matter of kneeling also prayer is subject to diversity of observance, through the act of some few who abstain from kneeling on the Sabbath; and since this dissension is particularly on its trial before the churches, the Lord will give His grace that the dissentients may either yield, or else indulge their opinion without offence to others. We, however (just as we have received), only on the day of the Lord's Resurrection ought to guard not only against kneeling, but every posture and office of solicitude; deferring even our businesses lest we give any place to the devil. Similarly, too, in the period of Pentecost; which period we distinguish by the same solemnity of exultation. But who would hesitate every day to prostrate himself before God, at least in the first prayer with which we enter on the daylight? At fasts, moreover, and Stations, no prayer should be made without kneeling, and the remaining customary marks of humility; for (then) we are not only praying, but deprecating, and making satisfaction to God our Lord. Touching times of prayer nothing at all has been prescribed, except clearly "to pray at every time and every place." 
Tertullian, On Prayer, ch.23

Chapter XXIV Of Place for Prayer 

{Mt 6:5-6; Acts 16:25; Acts 27:35}
But how "in every place," since we are prohibited (from praying) in public? In every place, he means, which opportunity or even necessity, may have rendered suitable: for that which was done by the apostles (who, in gaol, in the audience of the prisoners, "began praying and singing to God") is not considered to have been done contrary to the precept; nor yet that which was done by Paul, who in the ship, in presence of all, "made thanksgiving to God." 
Locations 61604-61618
Tertullian, On Prayer, ch.24

Chapter XXV  Of Time for Prayer

 {Acts 2:1-4, 14, 15}
Touching the time, however, the extrinsic observance of certain hours will not be unprofitable- those common hours, I mean, which mark the intervals of the day- the third, the sixth, the ninth- which we may find in the Scriptures to have been more solemn than the rest. The first infusion of the Holy Spirit into the congregated disciples took place at "the third hour."
Locations 61618-61621
Tertullian, On Prayer, ch.25

{Acts 10:9}
for prayer's sake "at the sixth hour." The same (apostle) was going into the temple, with John, "at the ninth hour," when he restored the paralytic to his health.
Locations 61622-61623
Tertullian, On Prayer, ch.25

{Col 3:2; Mt 6:33; Ps 63:1-4}
prayers which are due, without any admonition, on the entrance of light and of night. But, withal, it becomes believers not to take food, and not to go to the bath, before interposing a prayer; for the refreshments and nourishments of the spirit are to be held prior to those of the flesh, and things heavenly prior to things earthly. 
Tertullian, On Prayer, ch.25

Chapter XXVI Of the Parting of Brethren 

{Lk 10:5; Mt 25:38}
You will not dismiss a brother who has entered your house without prayer.-"
Locations 61627-61631
Tertullian, On Prayer, ch.26

Chapter XXVII Of Subjoining a Psalm 

{Ps 150:1,6}
* Perhaps "the great Hallelujah," i.e. the last five psalms. (source)
The more diligent in prayer are wont to subjoin in their prayers the "Hallelujah*," and such kind of psalms, in the closes of which the company respond.
Locations 61635-61636
Tertullian, On Prayer, ch.27

Chapter XXVIII Of the Spiritual Victim, Which Prayer is

{1 Pet 2:5; 1 Cor 14:15; Eph 6:18}
We are the true adorers and the true priests, who, praying in spirit, sacrifice, in spirit, prayer,- a victim proper and acceptable to God,
Locations 61643-61644
Tertullian, On Prayer, ch.28

Chapter XXIX The Power of Prayer

{2 Kings 4:42-44; 2 Kings 1:10,12; Mt 11:12; 1 Cor 15:52; 1 Thess 4:16}
* [Apocrypha, The Song, etc., verses 26, 27.](source)
But how far more amply operative is Christian prayer! It does not station the angel of dew in mid-fires*, nor muzzle lions, nor transfer to the hungry the rustics' bread; it has no delegated grace to avert any sense of suffering; but it supplies the suffering, and the feeling, and the grieving, with endurance: it amplifies grace by virtue, that faith may know what she obtains from the Lord, understanding what- for God's name's sake- she suffers. But in days gone by, withal prayer used to call down plagues, scatter the armies of foes, withhold the wholesome influences of the showers. Now, however, the prayer of righteousness averts all God's anger, keeps bivouac on behalf of personal enemies, makes supplication on behalf of persecutors. Is it wonder if it knows how to extort the rains of heaven-( prayer) which was once able to procure its fires? Prayer is alone that which vanquishes God. But Christ has willed that it be operative for no evil: He had conferred on it all its virtue in the cause of good. And so it knows nothing save how to recall the souls of the departed from the very path of death, to transform the weak, to restore the sick, to purge the possessed, to open prison-bars, to loose the bonds of the innocent.
Locations 61649-61658
Tertullian, On Prayer, ch.29

{Isa 40:15; Ps 1:4; Dan 2:35}
Location 46070
For this fact- that Gentiles are admissible to God's Law- is enough to prevent Israel from priding himself on the notion that "the Gentiles are accounted as a little drop of a bucket," or else as "dust out of a threshing-floor:"
Tertullian, An Answer to the Jews, ch.1

{Gen 25:23}
Location 46073
out of the womb of Rebecca "two peoples and two nations were about to proceed,"- of course those of the Jews, that is, of Israel; and of the Gentiles, that is ours. Each, then, was called a people and a nation;
Tertullian, An Answer to the Jews, ch.1

{Gen 25:23; Rom 9:10-13}
Location 46078
"Two nations are in thy womb, and two peoples shall be divided from thy bowels; and people shall overcome people, and the greater shall serve the less." Accordingly, since the people or nation of the Jews is anterior in time, and "greater" through the grace of primary favour in the Law, whereas ours is understood to be "less" in the age of times, as having in the last era of the world attained the knowledge of divine mercy: beyond doubt, through the edict of the divine utterance, the prior and "greater" people- that is, the Jewish- must necessarily serve the "less;" and the "less" people- that is, the Christian- overcome the "greater."
Tertullian, An Answer to the Jews, ch.1

{Rom 11:30; Gal 3:14}
Location 46090
it attains the grace of divine favour, from which Israel has been divorced.
Tertullian, An Answer to the Jews, ch.1

{Rom 5:13-14}
Location 46103
For the primordial law was given to Adam and Eve in paradise, as the womb of all the precepts of God. In short, if they had loved the Lord their God, they would not have contravened His precept;
Tertullian, An Answer to the Jews, ch.2

{Gen 3:6}
Location 46109
if they had not coveted another's, they would not have tasted of the unlawful fruit. Therefore, in this general and primordial law of God, the observance of which, in the case of the tree's fruit, He had sanctioned, we recognise enclosed all the precepts specially of the posterior Law, which germinated when disclosed at their proper times.
Tertullian, An Answer to the Jews, ch.2

{Gen 6:9; Gen 7:1; Heb 11:7; Isa 41:8; Jas 2:23}
Location 46114
In short, before the Law of Moses, written in stone-tables, I contend that there was a law unwritten, which was habitually understood naturally, and by the fathers was habitually kept. For whence was Noah "found righteous," if in his case the righteousness of a natural law had not preceded? Whence was Abraham accounted "a friend of God," if not on the ground of equity and righteousness, (in the observance) of a natural law?
Tertullian, An Answer to the Jews, ch.2

{Rom 3:30; Rom 4:9-12; Gal 5:2-6; Gal 6:12-13}
Location 46128
For if circumcision purges a man since God made Adam uncircumcised, why did He not circumcise him, even after his sinning, if circumcision purges?
Tertullian, An Answer to the Jews, ch.2

{Gen 4:3-7}
Location 46132
his brother Cain, who was not rightly dividing what he was offering.
Tertullian, An Answer to the Jews, ch.2

{Gen 19:29; 2 Pet 2:6-9}
Location 46135
Lot, withal, the brother of Abraham, proves that it was for the merits of righteousness, without observance of the law, that he was freed from the conflagration of the Sodomites.
Tertullian, An Answer to the Jews, ch.2

{Rom 4:9-12}
Location 46138
But Abraham, (you say,) was circumcised. Yes, but he pleased God before his circumcision; nor yet did he observe the Sabbath.
Tertullian, An Answer to the Jews, ch.3

{Ex 4:24-26}
Location 46144
whereas it is agreed that Zipporah did it on the journey, at the compulsion of the angel. Consider we, accordingly, that one single infant's compulsory circumcision cannot have prescribed to every people, and founded, as it were, a law for keeping this precept.
Tertullian, An Answer to the Jews, ch.3

{Rom 4:11; Isa 1:7-8; Isa 1:2; Isa 1:15}
Location 46149
For circumcision had to be given; but as "a sign," whence Israel in the last time would have to be distinguished, when, in accordance with their deserts, they should be prohibited from entering the holy city, as we see through the words of the prophets, saying, "Your land is desert; your cities utterly burnt with fire; your country, in your sight, strangers shall eat up; and, deserted and subverted by strange peoples, the daughter of Zion shall be derelict, like a shed in a vineyard, and like a watchhouse in a cucumber-field, and as it were a city which is being stormed." Why so? Because the subsequent discourse of the prophet reproaches them, saying, "Sons have I begotten and upraised, but they have reprobated me;" and again, "And if ye shall have outstretched hands, I will avert my face from you; and if ye shall have multiplied prayers, I will not hear you: for your hands are full of blood;"
Tertullian, An Answer to the Jews, ch.3

{Col 2:16-17; Gal 4:10-11}
Location 46187
the observance of the Sabbath is demonstrated to have been temporary.
Tertullian, An Answer to the Jews, ch.4

{Ex 20:8-11; Ex 12:16; Isa 1:13; Heb 4:9}
Location 46190
Whence we (Christians) understand that we still more ought to observe a sabbath from all "servile work" always, and not only every seventh day, but through all time. And through this arises the question for us, what sabbath God willed us to keep? For the Scriptures point to a sabbath eternal and a sabbath temporal.
Tertullian, An Answer to the Jews, ch.4

{Isa 66:23}
Location 46193
the temporal sabbath is human, and the eternal sabbath is accounted divine; concerning which He predicts through Isaiah: "And there shall be," He says, "month after month, and day after day, and sabbath after sabbath; and all flesh shall come to adore in Jerusalem, saith the Lord;" which we understand to have been fulfilled in the times of Christ, when "all flesh"- that is, every nation-" came to adore in Jerusalem" God the Father, through Jesus Christ His Son, as was predicted through the prophet: "Behold, proselytes through me shall go unto Thee." Thus, therefore, before this temporal sabbath, there was withal an eternal sabbath foreshown and foretold; just as before the carnal circumcision there was withal a spiritual circumcision foreshown.
Tertullian, An Answer to the Jews, ch.4

{Ex 20:8-11; Col 2:16-17}
Location 46202
But the Jews are sure to say, that ever since this precept was given through Moses, the observance has been binding. Manifest accordingly it is, that the precept was not eternal nor spiritual, but temporary, which would one day cease.
Tertullian, An Answer to the Jews, ch.4

{Heb 8:13; Heb 7:18-19: Col 2:16-17}
Location 46216
it was not with a view to its observance in perpetuity that God formerly gave them such a law.
Tertullian, An Answer to the Jews, ch.4

{Lev 17:1-9; Deut 12: 1-26; Mal 1:10-11[LXX]}
Location 46226
From this proceeding we gather that the twofold sacrifices of "the peoples" were even from the very beginning foreshown. In short, when the sacerdotal law was being drawn up, through Moses, in Leviticus, we find it prescribed to the people of Israel that sacrifices should in no other place be offered to God than in the land of promise; which the Lord God was about to give to "the people" Israel and to their brethren, in order that, on Israel's introduction thither, there should there be celebrated sacrifices and holocausts, as well for sins as for souls; and nowhere else but in the holy land. Why, accordingly, does the Spirit afterwards predict, through the prophets, that it should come to pass that in every place and in every land there should be offered sacrifices to God? as He says through the angel Malachi, one of the twelve prophets: "I will not receive sacrifice from your hands; for from the rising sun unto the setting my Name hath been made famous among all the nations, saith the Lord Almighty: and in every place they offer clean sacrifices to my Name."
Tertullian, An Answer to the Jews, ch.5

{Ps 51:17; Ps 50:14}
Location 46236
For that it is not by earthly sacrifices, but by spiritual, that offering is to be made to God, we thus read, as it is written, An heart contribulate and humbled is a victim for God;" and elsewhere, "Sacrifice to God a sacrifice of praise, and render to the Highest thy vows." Thus, accordingly, the spiritual "sacrifices of praise" are pointed to, and "an heart contribulate" is demonstrated an acceptable sacrifice to God. And thus, as carnal sacrifices are understood to be reprobated-
Tertullian, An Answer to the Jews, ch.5

{Isa 45:1; Ps 19:4; Rom 10:18}
Location 46270
as Isaiah: "Thus saith the Lord God to my Christ (the) Lord, whose right hand I have holden, that the nations may hear Him: the powers of kings will I burst asunder; I will open before Him the gates, and the cities shall not be closed to Him." Which very thing we see fulfilled. For whose right hand does God the Father hold but Christ's, His Son?- whom all nations have heard, that is, whom all nations have believed,- whose preachers, withal, the apostles, are pointed to in the Psalms of David: "Into the universal earth," says he, "is gone out their sound, and unto the ends of the earth their words." For upon whom else have the universal nations believed, but upon the Christ who is already come? For whom have the nations believed- Parthians, etc.
Tertullian, An Answer to the Jews, ch.7

{1 Tim 3:16; 2 Thess 1:10; Rom 16:26}
Location 46277
as, for instance, by this time, the varied races of the Gaetulians, and manifold confines of the Moors, all the limits of the Spains, and the diverse nations of the Gauls, and the haunts of the Britons- inaccessible to the Romans, but subjugated to Christ, and of the Sarmatians, and Dacians, and Germans, and Scythians, and of many remote nations, and of provinces and islands many,
Tertullian, An Answer to the Jews, ch.7

{Isa 45:1-2; Isa 22:22}
Location 46280
In all which places the name of the Christ who is already come reigns, as of Him before whom the gates of all cities have been opened, and to whom none are closed,
Tertullian, An Answer to the Jews, ch.7

{Esth 1:1; Esth 8:9}
Location 46288
if Nebuchadnezzar with his petty kings, "from India unto Ethiopia" he had his kingdom's boundaries;
Tertullian, An Answer to the Jews, ch.7

{Asia}
Location 46288
Alexander the Macedonian he did not hold more than universal Asia, and other regions, after he had quite conquered them;
Tertullian, An Answer to the Jews, ch.7

{Dan 9:26}
Location 46299
And so the times of the coming Christ, the Leader, must be inquired into, which we shall trace in Daniel; and, after computing them, shall prove Him to be come,
Tertullian, An Answer to the Jews, ch.8

{Dan 9:25-26}
Location 46311
from the going forth of a word for restoring and rebuilding Jerusalem unto the Christ, the Leader, hebdomads (seven and an half, and ) lxii and an half: and it shall convert, and shall be built into height and entrenchment, and the times shall be renewed: and after these lxii hebdomads shall the anointing be exterminated, and shall not be;
Tertullian, An Answer to the Jews, ch.8

{Dan 9:27}
Location 46315
And he shall confirm a testament in many. In one hebdomad and the half of the hebdomad shall be taken away my sacrifice and libation, and in the holy place the execration of devastation, (and ) until the end of (the) time consummation shall be given with regard to this devastation."
Tertullian, An Answer to the Jews, ch.8

{Dan 9:26}
Location 46321
but that when vii hebdomads and an half were fulfilling, He had to suffer, and the holy city had to be exterminated after one and an half hebdomad- whereby namely, the seven and an half hebdomads have been completed.
Tertullian, An Answer to the Jews, ch.8

{Dan 9:1, 23}
Location 46326
Whence we are bound to compute from the first year of Darius, when Daniel saw this vision.
Tertullian, An Answer to the Jews, ch.8

{Lk 2:1}
Location 46344
Let us see, moreover, how in the forty-first year of the empire of Augustus, when he has been reigning for xx and viii years after the death of Cleopatra, the Christ is born.
Tertullian, An Answer to the Jews, ch.8

{Dan 9:24}
Location 46348
And (then) "righteousness eternal" was manifested, and "an Holy One of holy ones was anointed"- that is, Christ- and "sealed was vision and prophet," and "sins" were remitted, which, through faith in the name of Christ, are washed away for all who believe on Him.
Tertullian, An Answer to the Jews, ch.8

{Dan 12:9; Rom 16:26}
Location 46351
since the prophecy was fulfilled through His advent, for that reason he said that "vision and prophecy were sealed;" inasmuch as He is the signet of all prophets, fulfilling all things which in days bygone they had announced of Him. For after the advent of Christ and His passion there is no longer "vision or prophet" to announce Him as to come. In short, if this is not so, let the Jews exhibit, subsequently to Christ, any volumes of prophets, visible miracles wrought by any angels, (such as those) which in bygone days the patriarchs saw until the advent of Christ, who is now come;
Tertullian, An Answer to the Jews, ch.8

{Mt 11:13; Lk 16:16}
Location 46356
"The law and the prophets (were) until John" the Baptist. For, on Christ's being baptized, that is, on His sanctifying the waters in His own baptism, all the plenitude of bygone spiritual grace-gifts ceased in Christ, sealing as He did all vision and prophecies, which by His advent He fulfilled. Whence most firmly does he assert that His advent "seals visions and prophecy."
Tertullian, An Answer to the Jews, ch.8

{Dan 9:26-27}
Location 46372
Therefore, when these times also were completed, and the Jews subdued, there afterwards ceased in that place "libations and sacrifices," which thenceforward have not been able to be in that place celebrated; for "the unction," too, was "exterminated" in that place after the passion of Christ.
Tertullian, An Answer to the Jews, ch.8

{Ex 12:6; Mk 14:12; Lk 22:7}
Location 46377
on the first day of unleavened bread, on which they slew the lamb at even, just as had been enjoined by Moses.
Tertullian, An Answer to the Jews, ch.8

{Isa 7:13-14}
Location 46386
Accordingly the Jews say: Let us challenge that prediction of Isaiah, and let us institute a comparison whether, in the case of the Christ who is already come, there be applicable to Him, firstly, the name which Isaiah foretold, and (secondly) the signs of it which he announced of Him.
Tertullian, An Answer to the Jews, ch.9

{Isa 7:13-14; Isa 8:4[LXX]}
Location 46389
"Now," say they, "that (Christ) of yours, who is come, neither was called by that name, nor engaged in warfare."
Tertullian, An Answer to the Jews, ch.9

{Mt 1:23}
Location 46391
God with us"- in order that you may regard not the sound only of the name, but the sense too. For the Hebrew sound, which is Emmanuel, has an interpretation, which is, God with us. Inquire, then, whether this speech, "God with us" (which is Emmanuel), be commonly applied to Christ ever since Christ's light has dawned,
Tertullian, An Answer to the Jews, ch.9

{Isa 8:4[LXX]}
Location 46404
Certainly, if nature nowhere allows this,-( namely,) to serve as a soldier before developing into manhood, to take "the power of Damascus" before knowing your father,- it follows that the pronouncement is visibly figurative.
Tertullian, An Answer to the Jews, ch.9

{Isa 8:4[LXX]; Mt 2:1-12}
Location 46417
Let those Eastern magi be believed, dowering with gold and incense the infancy of Christ as a king; and the infant has received "the power of Damascus" without battle and arms.
Tertullian, An Answer to the Jews, ch.9

{Zech 14:14; Ps 72:10, 15}
Location 46420
it says through Zechariah: "And Judah keepeth guard at Jerusalem, and shall amass all the vigour of the surrounding peoples, gold and silver." For of this gift of "gold" David likewise says, "And to Him shall be given of the gold of Arabia;" and again, "The kings of the Arabs and Saba shall bring Him gifts." For the East, on the one hand, generally held the magi (to be) kings;
Tertullian, An Answer to the Jews, ch.9

{Isa 8:4[LXX]}
Location 46424
"The spoils," moreover, "of Samaria" (He received in receiving) the magi themselves, who, on recognising Him, and honouring Him with gifts, and adoring Him on bended knee as Lord and King, on the evidence of the guiding and indicating star, became "the spoils of Samaria," that is, of idolatry- by believing, namely, on Christ. For (Scripture) denoted idolatry by the name of "Samaria," Samaria being ignominious on the score of idolatry; for she had at that time revolted from God under King Jeroboam.
Tertullian, An Answer to the Jews, ch.9

{Isa 8:4[LXX]}
Location 46434
On this wise, accordingly, (Scripture) entitled the magi also with the appellation of "Samaritans,"-" despoiled" (of that) which they had had in common with the Samaritans, as we have said- idolatry in opposition to the Lord. (It adds), "in opposition," moreover, "to the king of the Assyrians,"- in opposition to the devil, who to this hour thinks himself to be reigning, if he detrudes the saints from the religion of God.
Tertullian, An Answer to the Jews, ch.9

{Heb 4:12; Rev 1:16; Rev 2:12; Rev 19:15, 21; Eph 6:17}
Location 46443
See we, then, whether that which has another action be not another sword,- that is, the Divine word of God, doubly sharpened with the two Testaments of the ancient law and the new law; sharpened by the equity of its own wisdom; rendering to each one according to his own action.
Tertullian, An Answer to the Jews, ch.9

{Mal 3:1; Mt 11:10; Mk 1:2; Lk 7:27}
Location 46469
Nor is it a novel practice to the Holy Spirit to call those "angels" whom God has appointed as ministers of His power.
Tertullian, An Answer to the Jews, ch.9

{Mt 5:17; Jn 5:35; Isa 40:3; Jn 1:23; Jn 1:29,36}
Location 46472
coming "to fulfil the prophets," called so to the Jews. "He was," He says, "the burning and shining lamp;" as being he who not merely "prepared His ways in the desert," but withal, by pointing out "the Lamb of God," illumined the minds of men by his heralding, so that they understood Him to be that Lamb
Tertullian, An Answer to the Jews, ch.9

{Isa 11:1-2}
Location 46479
"And there shall be born," he says, "a rod from the root of Jesse"- which rod is Mary-" and a flower shall ascend from his root: and there shall rest upon him the Spirit of God, the spirit of wisdom and understanding, the spirit of discernment and piety, the spirit of counsel and truth; the spirit of God's fear shall fill Him."
Tertullian, An Answer to the Jews, ch.9

{Lk 1:27; Isa 11:1; Lk 2:1-7}
Location 46482
but accounted "of the root of Jesse," whence His origin is to be deduced,- to wit, through Mary. For He was from the native soil of Bethlehem, and from the house of David; as, among the Romans, Mary is described in the census, of whom is born Christ.
Tertullian, An Answer to the Jews, ch.9

{Isa 42:2-3; Mt 12:19-20}
Location 46488
who "crushed not the bruised reed"- Israel's faith, who "quenched not the burning flax"- that is, the momentary glow of the Gentiles- but made it shine more by the rising of His own light,- He
Tertullian, An Answer to the Jews, ch.9

{Isa 35:4-6; Jn 5:17-18; Jn 10:31-33}
Location 46495
moreover, He was to do acts of power from the Father: "Behold, our God will deal retributive judgment; Himself will come and save us: then shall the infirm be healed, and the eyes of the blind shall see, and the ears of the deaf shall hear, and the mutes' tongues shall be loosed, and the lame shall leap as an hart," and so on; which works not even you deny that Christ did, inasmuch as you were wont to say that, "on account of the works ye stoned Him not, but because He did them on the Sabbaths."
Tertullian, An Answer to the Jews, ch.9

{1 Pet 2:22; Isa 53:9}
Location 46508
On the other hand, Christ, who spoke not guile from His mouth, and who exhibited all righteousness and humility, not only (as we have above recorded it predicted of Him) was not exposed to that kind of death for his own deserts, but (was so exposed) in order that what was predicted by the prophets as destined to come upon Him through your means might be fulfilled;
Tertullian, An Answer to the Jews, ch.10

{Mt 26:56: Mt 27:34-35, Jn 19:23,24,28,32-37}
Location 46513
He, actually and thoroughly suffering, suffered not for any evil action of His own, but "that the Scriptures from the mouth of the prophets might be fulfilled."
Tertullian, An Answer to the Jews, ch.10

{Gen 22:1-10; Jn 19:17}
Location 46518
Accordingly, to begin with, Isaac, when led by his father as a victim, and himself bearing his own "wood," was even at that early period pointing to Christ's death;
Tertullian, An Answer to the Jews, ch.10

{Rom 9:5}
Location 46520
Joseph, again, himself was made a figure of Christ in this point alone (to name no more, not to delay my own course), that he suffered persecution at the hands of his brethren, and was sold into Egypt, on account of the favour of God; just as Christ was sold by Israel-( and therefore,) "according to the flesh," by His "brethren"- when He is betrayed by Judas.
Tertullian, An Answer to the Jews, ch.10

{Gen 34:25-31; Gen 49:5-7}
Location 46530
When Jacob pronounced a blessing on Simeon and Levi, he prophesies of the scribes and Pharisees; for from them is derived their origin. For (his blessing) interprets spiritually thus: "Simeon and Levi perfected iniquity out of their sect,"- whereby, to wit, they persecuted Christ: "into their counsel come not my soul! and upon their station rest not my heart! because in their indignation they slew men"- that is, prophets-" and in their concupiscence they hamstrung a bull!"- that is, Christ, whom- after the slaughter of prophets- they slew, and exhausted their savagery by transfixing His sinews with nails.
Tertullian, An Answer to the Jews, ch.10

{Ex 17:8-13}
Location 46536
Moses, why, I wonder, did he merely at the time when Joshua was battling against Amalek, pray sitting with hands expanded,
Tertullian, An Answer to the Jews, ch.10

{Ex 17:8-16; Col 2:14-15}
Location 46538
except it was that there, where the name of the Lord Jesus was the theme of speech- destined as He was to enter the lists one day singly against the devil- the figure of the cross was also necessary, (that figure) through which Jesus was to win the victory?
Tertullian, An Answer to the Jews, ch.10

{Num 21:4-9; Col 2:14-15; Gen 3:1; 2 Cor 11:3; Rev 12:9; 2 Cor 11:14-15; Mt 25:41; Rev 12:9}
A ligno. Oehler refers us to Ps. xcvi. 10 (xcv. 10 in LXX.); but the special words "a ligno" are wanting there, though the text is often quoted by the Fathers. (source)
Location 46540
brazen serpent, placed on a "tree," in a hanging posture, for a spectacle of healing to Israel, at the time when, after their idolatry, they were suffering extermination by serpents, except that in this case he was exhibiting the Lord's cross on which the "serpent" the devil was "made a show of," and, for every one hurt by such snakes- that is, his angels- on turning intently from the peccancy of sins to the sacraments of Christ's cross, salvation was outwrought? For he who then gazed upon that (cross) was freed from the bite of the serpents. Come, now, if you have read in the utterance of the prophet in the Psalms, "God hath reigned from the tree*," I wait to hear what you understand thereby; for fear you may perhaps think some carpenter-king is signified, and not Christ, who has reigned from that time onward when he overcame the death which ensued from His passion of "the tree." 
Tertullian, An Answer to the Jews, ch.10

{Jer 11:19 [LXX]; Jn 19:17; Jn 6:51}
Location 46552
it is that God hints, through Jeremiah, that you would say, "Come, let us put wood into his bread, and let us wear him away out of the land of the living; and his name shall no more be remembered." Of course on His body that "wood" was put; for so Christ has revealed, calling His body "bread," whose body the prophet in bygone days announced under the term "bread."
Tertullian, An Answer to the Jews, ch.10

{Ps 22:16, 21}
Location 46554
If you shall still seek for predictions of the Lord's cross, the twenty-first Psalm will at length be able to satisfy you, containing as it does the whole passion of Christ; singing, as He does, even at so early a date, His own glory. "They dug," He says, "my hands and feet"- which is the peculiar atrocity of the cross; and again when He implores the aid of the Father, "Save me," He says, "out of the mouth of the lion"- of course, of death-" and from the horn of the unicorns my humility,"- from the ends, to wit, of the cross, as we have above shown; which cross neither David himself suffered, nor any of the kings of the Jews:
Tertullian, An Answer to the Jews, ch.10

{Isa 53:8-10}
Location 46563
I desire to show, in one utterance of Isaiah, His death, and passion, and sepulture. "By the crimes," he says, "of my people was He led unto death; and I will give the evil for His sepulture, and the rich for His death, because He did not wickedness, nor was guile found in his mouth; and God willed to redeem His soul from death," and so forth.
Tertullian, An Answer to the Jews, ch.10

{Isa 57:2}
Location 46566
He says again, moreover: "His sepulture hath been taken away from the midst." For neither was He buried except He were dead, nor was His sepulture removed from the midst except through His resurrection.
Tertullian, An Answer to the Jews, ch.10

{Am 8:9-10}
Location 46571
For that which happened at His passion, that mid-day grew dark, the prophet Amos announces, saying, "And it shall be," he says, "in that day, saith the Lord, the sun shall set at mid-day, and the day of light shall grow dark over the land: and I will convert your festive days into grief, and all your canticles into lamentation; and I will lay upon your loins sackcloth, and upon every head baldness; and I will make the grief like that for a beloved (son), and them that are with him like a day of mourning."
Tertullian, An Answer to the Jews, ch.10

{Mt 26:17; Mk 14:12; Lk 22:7; Jn 18:28; 1 Cor 5:7}
Location 46577
Which prediction was thus also fulfilled, that "on the first day of unleavened bread" you slew Christ; and (that the prophecies might be fulfilled) the day hasted to make an "eventide,"- that is, to cause darkness, which was made at mid-day; and thus "your festive days God converted into grief, and your canticles into lamentation." For after the passion of Christ there overtook you even captivity and dispersion, predicted before through the Holy Spirit.
Tertullian, An Answer to the Jews, ch.10

{Ezek 8:12-9:6; Rev 1:13}
Location 46591
Are such deeds trifles to the house of Judah, that they should do the enormities which these have done? because they have filled up (the measure of) their impieties, and, behold, are themselves, as it were, grimacing; I will deal with mine indignation, mine eye shall not spare, neither will I pity; they shall cry out unto mine ears with a loud voice, and I will not hear them, nay, I will not pity. And He cried into mine ears with a loud voice, saying, The vengeance of this city is at hand; and each one had vessels of extermination in his hand. And, behold, six men were coming toward the way of the high gate which was looking toward the north, and each one's double-axe of dispersion was in his hand: and one man in the midst of them, clothed with a garment reaching to the feet, and a girdle of sapphire about his loins: and they entered, and took their stand close to the brazen altar. And the glory of the God of Israel, which was over the house, in the open court of it, ascended from the cherubim: and the Lord called the man who was clothed with the garment reaching to the feet, who had upon his loins the girdle; and said unto him, Pass through the midst of Jerusalem, and write the sign Tau on the foreheads of the men who groan and grieve over all the enormities which are done in their midst. And while these things were doing, He said unto an hearer, Go ye after him into the city, and cut short; and spare not with your eyes, and pity not elder or youth or virgin; and little ones and women slay ye all, that they may be thoroughly wiped away; but all upon whom is the sign Tau approach ye not; and begin with my saints."
Tertullian, An Answer to the Jews, ch.11

{Ps 2:7-8}
Location 46623
Psalms, which says, "My Son art Thou; to-day have I begotten Thee. Ask of Me, and I will give Thee Gentiles as Thine heritage, and as Thy possession the bounds of the earth." For you will not be able to affirm that "son" to be David rather than Christ; or the "bounds of the earth" to have been promised rather to David, who reigned within the single (country of) Judea, than to Christ, who has already taken captive the whole orb with the faith of His gospel;
Tertullian, An Answer to the Jews, ch.12

{Isa 42:6-7; Isa 61:1; Lk 4:14-18}
Location 46626
He says through Isaiah: "Behold, I have given Thee for a covenant of my family, for a light of Gentiles, that Thou mayst open the eyes of the blind"- of course, such as err-" to outloose from bonds the bound"- that is, to free them from sins-" and from the house of prison"- that is, of death-" such as sit in darkness"- of ignorance, to wit. And if these blessings accrue through Christ,
Tertullian, An Answer to the Jews, ch.12

{Isa 1:7; Jn 5:43; Jn 10:37-38; Isa 33:17-18}
Location 46640
"your region strangers shall eat up in your sight, and it shall be desert and subverted by alien peoples." And in another place it is thus said through the prophet: "The King with His glory ye shall see,"- that is, Christ, doing deeds of power in the glory of God the Father; "and your eyes shall see the land from afar,"- which is what you do, being prohibited, in reward of your deserts, since the storming of Jerusalem, to enter into your land; it is permitted you merely to see it with your eyes from afar: "your soul," he says, "shall meditate terror,"- namely, at the time when they suffered the ruin of themselves.
Tertullian, An Answer to the Jews, ch.13

{Mic 5:2; Mt 2:1}
Location 46650
If, then, there is no unction, whence shall be anointed the "leader" who shall be born in Bethlehem? or how shall he proceed "from Bethlehem," seeing that of the seed of Israel none at all exists in Bethlehem.
Tertullian, An Answer to the Jews, ch.13

{Dan 9:26; Isa 65:2; Rom 10:21}
Location 46653
For, after His advent, we read, according to Daniel, that the city itself had to be exterminated; and we recognise that so it has befallen. For the Scripture says thus, that "the city and the holy place are simultaneously exterminated together with the leader,"- undoubtedly (that Leader) who was to proceed "from Bethlehem," and from the tribe of "Judah." Whence, again, it is manifest that "the city must simultaneously be exterminated" at the time when its "Leader" had to suffer in it, (as foretold) through the Scriptures of the prophets, who say: "I have outstretched my hands the whole day unto a People contumacious and gainsaying Me, who walketh in a way not good, but after their own sins."
Tertullian, An Answer to the Jews, ch.13

{Ps 22:16-17; Ps 96:10}
Location 46658
And in the Psalms, David says: "They exterminated my hands and feet: they counted all my bones; they themselves, moreover, contemplated and saw me, and in my thirst slaked me with vinegar." These things David did not suffer, so as to seem justly to have spoken of himself; but the Christ who was crucified. Moreover, the "hands and feet," are not "exterminated," except His who is suspended on a "tree." Whence, again, David said that "the Lord would reign from the tree:"
Tertullian, An Answer to the Jews, ch.13

{Ex 15:22-26; Acts 26:18}
Location 46665
Moses sweetened the bitter water; whence the People, which was perishing of thirst in the desert, drank and revived; just as we do, who, drawn out from the calamities of the heathendom in which we were tarrying perishing with thirst (that is, deprived of the divine word), drinking, "by the faith which is on Him," the baptismal water of the "tree" of the passion of Christ, have revived
Tertullian, An Answer to the Jews, ch.13

{Am 8:9; Mt 27:45, 50-52; Mk 15:33,37-38; Lk 23:44-45; Rev 22:1,17; Rev 21:6; Jn 7:37-39; Jer 2:10-13}
Location 46671
and "the sun grew dark at mid-day:" (and when did it "shudder exceedingly" except at the passion of Christ, when the earth also trembled to her centre, and the veil of the temple was rent, and the tombs were burst asunder? "because these two evils hath My People done; Me," He says, "they have quite forsaken, the fount of water of life, and they have digged for themselves worn-out tanks, which will not be able to contain water."
Tertullian, An Answer to the Jews, ch.13

{2 Kings 6:1-7; Lk 4:27}
Location 46681
when the sons of the prophets were cutting "wood" with axes on the bank of the river Jordan, the iron flew off and sank in the stream; and so, on Elisha
Tertullian, An Answer to the Jews, ch.13

{Gal 3:13; Rom 5:12-19}
Location 46684
What is more manifest than the mystery of this "wood,"- that the obduracy of this world had been sunk in the profundity of error, and is freed in baptism by the "wood" of Christ, that is, of His passion; in order that what had formerly perished through the "tree" in Adam, should be restored through the "tree" in Christ?
Tertullian, An Answer to the Jews, ch.13

{Gen 22:1-14}
Location 46692
the ram being offered which was caught by the horns in the bramble; Christ, on the other hand, in His times, carried His "wood" on His own shoulders, adhering to the horns of the cross, with a thorny crown encircling His head.
Tertullian, An Answer to the Jews, ch.13

{Isa 53:7-8}
Location 46695
for "in humility His judgment was taken away: His nativity, moreover, who shall declare?" Because no one at all of human beings was conscious of the nativity of Christ at His conception, when as the Virgin Mary was found pregnant by the word of God; and because "His life was to be taken from the land."
Tertullian, An Answer to the Jews, ch.13

{Hos 6:1-2}
Location 46698
in accordance with a prophecy of Hosea, uttered on this wise: "Before daybreak shall they arise unto Me, saying, Let us go and return unto the Lord our God, because Himself will draw us out and free us. After a space of two days, on the third day"- which is His glorious resurrection- He received back into the heavens
Tertullian, An Answer to the Jews, ch.13

{Mt 11:13; Lk 16:16; Jn 5:1-9}
Location 46710
And thus, the former gifts of grace being withdrawn, "the law and the prophets were until John," and the fishpool of Bethsaida until the advent of Christ: thereafter it ceased curatively to remove from Israel infirmities of health;
Tertullian, An Answer to the Jews, ch.13

{Isa 52:5; Ezek 36:20,23; Rom 2:24; Isa 55:6-7; Lk 19:41-44}
Location 46712
"On your account the name of God is blasphemed among the Gentiles:" for it is from them that the infamy (attached to that name) began, and (was propagated during) the interval from Tiberius to Vespasian. And because they had committed these crimes, and had failed to understand that Christ "was to be found" in "the time of their visitation," their land has been made "desert, and their cities utterly burnt with fire,
Tertullian, An Answer to the Jews, ch.13

{Ps 59:11}
Location 46719
Christ, by not hearing whom they perished; who, again, in the Psalm, demands of the Father their dispersion, saying, "Disperse them in Thy power;"
Tertullian, An Answer to the Jews, ch.13

{Jer 17:9 [LXX]}
Location 46747
Jeremiah says: "He is a human being, and who will learn to know Him?"
Tertullian, An Answer to the Jews, ch.14

{Zech 3:1-10; Jn 6:70; Jn 13:2}
Location 46748
So, too, in Zechariah, in His own person, nay, in the very mystery of His name withal, the most true Priest of the Father, His own Christ, is delineated in a twofold garb with reference to the two advents. First, He was clad in "sordid attire," that is, in the indignity of passible and mortal flesh, when the devil, withal, was opposing himself to Him- the instigator, to wit, of Judas the traitor- who even after His baptism had tempted Him. In the next place, He was stripped of His former sordid raiment, and adorned with a garment down to the foot, and with a turban and a clean mitre, that is, (with the garb) of the second advent; since He is demonstrated as having attained "glory and honour."
Tertullian, An Answer to the Jews, ch.14

{Hag 1:1,12; Hag 2:2, 4; Zech 6:11}
Location 46753
Nor will you be able to say that the man (there depicted) is "the son of Jozadak,"
Tertullian, An Answer to the Jews, ch.14

{Heb 10:21; Heb 2:17; Heb 3:1; Heb 4:14-15; Heb 5:5,10; Heb 6:20; Heb 7:26, 28; Heb 8:1,3 Heb 9:11}
Location 46754
But the "Jesus" there alluded to is Christ, the Priest of God the Most High Father;
Tertullian, An Answer to the Jews, ch.14

{Lev 16:28}
Location 46757
So, again, I will make an interpretation of the two goats which were habitually offered on the fast-day. Do not they, too, point to each successive stage in the character of the Christ who is already come?
Tertullian, An Answer to the Jews, ch.14

{Heb 13:10-13}
Location 46760
But the one of them, begirt with scarlet, amid cursing and universal spitting, and tearing, and piercing, was cast away by the People outside the city into perdition, marked with manifest tokens of Christ's passion; who, after being begirt with scarlet garment, and subjected to universal spitting, and afflicted with all contumelies, was crucified outside the city.
Tertullian, An Answer to the Jews, ch.14

{Lev 6:30}
Location 46762
The other, however, offered for sins, and given as food to the priests merely of the temple, gave signal evidences of the second appearance; in so far as, after the expiation of all sins, the priests of the spiritual temple, that is, of the church, were to enjoy a spiritual public distribution (as it were) of the Lord's grace,
Tertullian, An Answer to the Jews, ch.14

{Isa 52:14; Isa 53:1-3; Phil 2:6-8}
Location 46769
And thus to the present moment they affirm that their Christ is not come, because He is not come in majesty; while they are ignorant of the fact that He was first to come in humility.
Tertullian, An Answer to the Jews, ch.14


{1 Cor 8:6; Mt 4:3,6}
He maintains that there is one only Lord, the Almighty Creator of the world, in order that out of this doctrine of the unity he may fabricate a heresy. He says that the Father Himself came down into the Virgin, was Himself born of her, Himself suffered, indeed was Himself Jesus Christ. Here the old serpent has fallen out with himself, since, when he tempted Christ after John's baptism, he approached Him as "the Son of God;" surely intimating that God had a Son. Locations 59047-59056
Tertullian, Against Praxeas, ch.1

{Mt 4:3,6; Ps 91:11; Jn 8:44; 1 Cor 13:3; Montanists}
*Probably Victor.(source)
temptation: "If thou be the Son of God, command that these stones be made bread." Again: "If thou be the Son of God, cast thyself down from hence; for it is written, He shall give His angels charge concerning thee"- referring no doubt, to the Father-" and in their hands they shall bear thee up, that thou hurt not thy foot against a stone." Or perhaps, after all, he was only reproaching the Gospels with a lie, saying in fact: "Away with Matthew; away with Luke! Why heed their words? In spite of them, I declare that it was God Himself that I approached; it was the Almighty Himself that I tempted face to face; and it was for no other purpose than to tempt Him that I approached Him. If, on the contrary, it had been only the Son of God, most likely I should never have condescended to deal with Him." However, he is himself a liar from the beginning, and whatever man he instigates in his own way; as, for instance, Praxeas. For he was the first to import into Rome from Asia this kind of heretical pravity, a man in other respects of restless disposition, and above all inflated with the pride of confessorship simply and solely because he had to bear for a short time the annoyance of a prison; on which occasion, even "if he had given his body to be burned, it would have profited him nothing," not having the love of God, whose very gifts he has resisted and destroyed. For after the Bishop of Rome* had acknowledged the prophetic gifts of Montanus, Prisca, and Maximilla, and, in consequence of the acknowledgment, had bestowed his peace on the churches of Asia and Phrygia, he, by importunately urging false accusations against the prophets themselves and their churches, and insisting on the authority of the bishop's predecessors in the see, compelled him to recall the pacific letter which he had issued, as well as to desist from his purpose of acknowledging the said gifts. Locations 59056-59069
Tertullian, Against Praxeas, ch.1

{Apostles Creed; Jn 16:13; Col 1:16}
In the course of time, then, the Father indeed was born, and the Father suffered, God Himself, the Lord Almighty, whom in their preaching they declare to be Jesus Christ!! We, however, as we indeed always have done (and more especially since we have been better instructed by the Paraclete, who leads men indeed into all truth), believe that there is one only God, but under the following dispensation, or oikonomia , as it is called, that this one only God has also a Son, His Word, who proceeded from Himself, by whom all things were made, and without whom nothing was made. Him we believe to have been sent by the Father into the virgin, and to have been born of her- being both Man and God, the Son of Man and the Son of God, and to have been called by the name of Jesus Christ; we believe Him to have suffered, died, and been buried, according to the Scriptures, and, after He had been raised again by the Father and taken back to heaven, to be sitting at the right hand of the Father, and that He will come to judge the quick and the dead; who sent also from heaven from the Father, according to His own promise, the Holy Ghost, the Paraclete, the sanctifier of the faith of those who believe in the Father, and in the Son, and in the Holy Ghost. That this rule of faith has come down to us from the beginning of the gospel, even
Locations 59078-59089
Tertullian, Against Praxeas, ch.2

{2 Cor 13:13; Deut 4:35, 39; Deut 6:4}
before any of the older heretics, much more before Praxeas, a pretender of yesterday, will be apparent both from the lateness of date which marks all heresies, and also from the absolutely novel character of our new-fangled Praxeas. In this principle also we must henceforth find a presumption of equal force against all heresies whatsoever- that whatever is first is true, whereas that is spurious which is later in date. But keeping this prescriptive rule inviolate, still some opportunity must be given for reviewing (the statements of heretics), with a view to the instruction and protection of divers persons; were it only that it may not seem that each perversion of the truth is condemned without examination, and simply prejudged; especially in the case of this heresy, which supposes itself to possess the pure truth, in thinking that one cannot believe in One Only God in any other way than by saying that the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost are the very selfsame Person. As if in this way also one were not All, in that All are of One, by unity (that is) of substance; while the mystery of the dispensation is still guarded, which distributes the Unity into a Trinity, placing in their order the three Persons- the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost: three, however, not in condition, but in degree; not in substance, but in form; not in power, but in aspect; yet of one substance, and of one condition, and of one power, inasmuch as He is one God, from whom these degrees and forms and aspects are reckoned, under the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. How they are susceptible of number without division, will be shown as our treatise proceeds. 
Tertullian, Against Praxeas, ch.2

{1 Thess 1:9; 1 Cor 12:2; 1 Cor 8:4-6}
The simple, indeed, (I will not call them unwise and unlearned,) who always constitute the majority of believers, are startled at the dispensation (of the Three in One), on the ground that their very rule of faith withdraws them from the world's plurality of gods to the one only true God. Locations 59089-59104
Tertullian, Against Praxeas, ch.3

{Jn 17:21-22; Mt 3:16-17; 1 Cor 8:6}
God; not understanding that, although He is the one only God, He must yet be believed in with His own oikonomia. The numerical order and distribution of the Trinity they assume to be a division of the Unity; whereas the Unity which derives the Trinity out of its own self is so far from being destroyed, that it is actually supported by it. They are constantly throwing out against us that we are preachers of two gods and three gods, while they take to themselves pre-eminently the credit of being worshippers of the One God;
Locations 59104-59107
Tertullian, Against Praxeas, ch.3

{Heb 1:5; Ps 2:7}
Well, then Latins take pains to pronounce the monarchia (or Monarchy), while Greeks actually refuse to understand the oikonomia, or Dispensation (of the Three in One). As for myself, however, if I have gleaned any knowledge of either language, I am sure that monarchia (or Monarchy) has no other meaning than single and individual rule; but for all that, this monarchy does not, because it is the government of one, preclude him whose government it is, either from having a son, or from having made himself actually a son to himself, or from ministering his own monarchy by whatever agents he will.
Locations 59110-59114
Tertullian, Against Praxeas, ch.3

{Jn 10:30; Jn 17:21}
itself. If, moreover, there be a son belonging to him whose monarchy it is, it does not forthwith become divided and cease to be a monarchy, if the son also be taken as a sharer in it; but it is as to its origin equally his, by whom it is communicated to the son; and being his, it is quite as much a monarchy (or sole empire), since it is held together by two who are so inseparable. Locations 59116-59119
Tertullian, Against Praxeas, ch.3

{Jn 1:18; Jn 17:5}
how comes it to pass that God should be thought to suffer division and severance in the Son and in the Holy Ghost, who have the second and the third places assigned to them, and who are so closely joined with the Father in His substance, when He suffers no such (division and severance) in the multitude of so many angels?
Locations 59121-59124
Tertullian, Against Praxeas, ch.3

{Jn 5:19; Jn 8:28; Mt 28:18; Eph 1:20-21; Jn 14:26; Jn 15:26; Jn 16:13-15; Acts 2:33; Lk 24:49}
But as for me, who derive the Son from no other source but from the substance of the Father, and (represent Him) as doing nothing without the Father's will, and as having received all power from the Father, how can I be possibly destroying the Monarchy from the faith, when I preserve it in the Son just as it was committed to Him by the Father? The same remark (I wish also to be formally) made by me with respect to the third degree in the Godhead, because I believe the Spirit to proceed from no other source than from the Father through the Son.
Locations 59132-59135
Tertullian, Against Praxeas, ch.4

{1 Cor 15:27-28; Mt 11:27; Lk 10:22}
We thus see that the Son is no obstacle to the Monarchy, although it is now administered by the Son; because with the Son it is still in its own state, and with its own state will be restored to the Father by the Son.
Locations 59142-59143
Tertullian, Against Praxeas, ch.4

{1 Cor 15:27-28}
from this one passage of the epistle of the inspired apostle, we have been already able to show that the Father and the Son are two separate Persons, not only by the mention of their separate names as Father and the Son, but also by the fact that He who delivered up the kingdom, and He to whom it is delivered up-
Locations 59145-59147
Tertullian, Against Praxeas, ch.4

{Isa 43:10; Ps 90:2; Col 1:17; Acts 17:28; Jn 1:1-3}
*1 See St. Jerome's Quæstt. Hebr. in Genesim, ii. 507.(source)
*2 Sermonem. [He always calls the Logos not Verbum, but Sermo, in this treatise. A masculine word was better to exhibit our author's thought. So Erasmus translates Logos in his N. Testament, on which see Kaye, p. 516.] (source)

There are some who allege that even Genesis opens thus in Hebrew: "In the beginning God made for Himself a Son.*1" As there is no ground for this, I am led to other arguments derived from God's own dispensation, in which He existed before the creation of the world, up to the generation of the Son. For before all things God was alone- being in Himself and for Himself universe, and space, and all things. Moreover, He was alone, because there was nothing external to Him but Himself. Yet even not then was He alone; for He had with Him that which He possessed in Himself, that is to say, His own Reason. For God is rational, and Reason was first in Him; and so all things were from Himself. This Reason is His own Thought (or Consciousness= Sensus ipsius.(source)) which the Greeks call logos, by which term we also designate Word or Discourse*2 and therefore it is now usual with our people, owing to the mere simple interpretation of the term, to say that the Word (=Sermonen) was in the beginning with God; although it would be more suitable to regard Reason as the more ancient; because God had not Word (=Sermonalis) from the beginning, but He had Reason (=Rationalis) even before the beginning;
Locations 59152-59160
Tertullian, Against Praxeas, ch.5

{Rom 10:8; Deut 30:14}
Observe, then, that when you are silently conversing with yourself, this very process is carried on within you by your reason, which meets you with a word at every movement of your thought, at every impulse of your conception. Whatever you think, there is a word; whatever you conceive, there is reason.
Locations 59166-59168
Tertullian, Against Praxeas, ch.5

{Prov 8:22-31; Jn 17:5; Jn 1:1-3; Col 1:15-17}
Thus, in a certain sense, the word is a second person within you, through which in thinking you utter speech, and through which also, (by reciprocity of process,) in uttering speech you generate thought. The word is itself a different thing from yourself. . . . I may therefore without rashness first lay this down (as a fixed principle) that even then before the creation of the universe God was not alone, since He had within Himself both Reason, and, inherent in Reason, His Word, which He made second to Himself by agitating it within Himself. 
Locations 59170-59177
Tertullian, Against Praxeas, ch.5

{Prov 8:22-25,27}
the Divine Intelligence is set forth also in the Scriptures under the name of Sophia, Wisdom; for what can be better entitled to the name of Wisdom (=Sapientius (source) <sapientia) than the Reason or the Word of God? Listen therefore to Wisdom herself, constituted in the character of a Second Person: "At the first the Lord created me as the beginning of His ways, with a view to His own works, before He made the earth, before the mountains were settled; moreover, before all the hills did He beget me;" that is to say, He created and generated me in His own intelligence. Then, again, observe the distinction between them implied in the companionship of Wisdom with the Lord. "When He prepared the heaven," says Wisdom, "I was present with Him;
Locations 59178-59183
Tertullian, Against Praxeas, ch.6

{Jn 1:1-3}
He first put forth the Word Himself, having within Him His own inseparable Reason and Wisdom, in order that all things might be made through Him through whom they had been planned and disposed, yea, and already made, so far forth as (they were) in the mind and intelligence of God. This, however, was still wanting to them, that they should also be openly known, and kept permanently in their proper forms and substances. 
Locations 59186-59189
Tertullian, Against Praxeas, ch.6

{Gen 1:3; Prov 8:22,27; Col 1:15}
*1 Conditus. [See Theophilus To Autolycus, cap. x. note 1, p. 98, Vol. II. of this series. Also Ibid. p. 103, note 5. On the whole subject, Bp. Bull, Defensio Fid. Nicænæ. Vol. V. pp. 585-592.](source)
*2 See this reading, and its application, fully discussed in our note 5, p. 66, of the Anti-Marcion, Edin. (source)
Then, therefore, does the Word also Himself assume His own form and glorious garb, His own sound and vocal utterance, when God says, "Let there be light." This is the perfect nativity of the Word, when He proceeds forth from God- formed*1 by Him first to devise and think out all things under the name of Wisdom-" The Lord created or formed me as the beginning of His ways;" then afterward begotten, to carry all into effect-" When He prepared the heaven, I was present with Him." Thus does He make Him equal to Him: for by proceeding from Himself He became His first-begotten Son, because begotten before all things; and His only-begotten also, because alone begotten of God, in a way peculiar to Himself, from the womb of His own heart- even as the Father Himself testifies: "My heart," says He, "hath emitted my most excellent Word.*2"
Locations 59191-59197
Tertullian, Against Praxeas, ch.7

{Prov 8:22,25; Jn 1:3; Ps 33:6}
name of Wisdom: "The Lord formed Me as the beginning of His ways, with a view to His own works; before all the hills did He beget Me." For if indeed Wisdom in this passage seems to say that She was created by the Lord with a view to His works, and to accomplish His ways, yet proof is given in another Scripture that "all things were made by the Word, and without Him was there nothing made;" as, again, in another place (it is said), "By His word were the heavens established, and all the powers thereof by His Spirit"- that is to say, by the Spirit (or Divine Nature) which was in the Word: thus is it evident that it is one and the same power which is in one place described under the name of Wisdom, and in another passage under the appellation of the Word, which was initiated for the works of God
Locations 59199-59204
Tertullian, Against Praxeas, ch.7

{Jn 1:14; Rom 1:3-4; Gal 4:4; Phil 2:7-8; 1 Tim 3:16; Heb 2:14; 1 Jn 1:1-2}
He became also the Son of God, and was begotten when He proceeded forth from Him. Do you then, (you ask,) grant that the Word is a certain substance, constructed by the Spirit and the communication of Wisdom? Certainly I do. But you will not allow Him to be really a substantive being, by having a substance of His own; in such a way that He may be regarded as an objective thing and a person, and so be able (as being constituted second to God the Father,) to make two, the Father and the Son, God and the Word.
Locations 59206-59210
Tertullian, Against Praxeas, ch.7

{Jn 1:1; Ex 20:7; Phil 2:6; Jn 4:24}
*This doctrine of the soul's corporeality in a certain sense is treated by Tertullian in his De Resurr. Carn. xvii., and De Anima v. By Tertullian, spirit and soul were considered identical. See our Anti-Marcion, p. 451, note 4, Edin. (source)
Is that Word of God, then, a void and empty thing, which is called the Son, who Himself is designated God? "The Word was with God, and the Word was God." It is written, "Thou shalt not take God's name in vain." This for certain is He "who, being in the form of God, thought it not robbery to be equal with God." In what form of God? Of course he means in some form, not in none. For who will deny that God is a body, although "God is a Spirit?" For Spirit has a bodily substance of its own kind, in its own form.*
Locations 59216-59220
Tertullian, Against Praxeas, ch.7

{Mt 11:27; Jn 1:18; Jn 8:26; Jn 6:38; 1 Cor 2:11;Jn 14:11; Jn 1:1; Jn 10:30}
*1 See Adv. Valentin. cc. xiv. xv.

Valentinus divides and separates his prolations from their Author, and places them at so great a distance from Him, that the AEon (*It is a Latin transliteration from the koine Greek word  (ho aion), from the archaic  (aiwon).source / Strong's Greek 165. aión ) does not know the Father: he longs, indeed, to know Him, but cannot; nay, he is almost swallowed up and dissolved into the rest of matter.*1 With us, however, the Son alone knows the Father, and has Himself unfolded "the Father's bosom." He has also heard and seen all things with the Father; and what He has been commanded by the Father, that also does He speak. And it is not His own will, but the Father's, which He has accomplished, which He had known most intimately, even from the beginning. "For what man knoweth the things which be in God, but the Spirit which is in Him?" But the Word was formed by the Spirit, and (if I may so express myself) the Spirit is the body of the Word. The Word, therefore, is both always in the Father, as He says, "I am in the Father;" and is always with God, according to what is written, "And the Word was with God;" and never separate from the Father, or other than the Father, since "I and the Father are one." This will be the prolation, taught by the truth (Literally, the , "of the truth."), the guardian of the Unity, wherein we declare that the Son is a prolation from the Father, without being separated from Him. For God sent forth the Word, as the Paraclete also declares, just as the root puts forth the tree, and the fountain the river, and the sun the ray. For these are probolai ( ), or emanations, of the substances from which they proceed. I should not hesitate, indeed, to call the tree the son or offspring of the root, and the river of the fountain, and the ray of the sun; because every original source is a parent, and everything which issues from the origin is an offspring. Much more is (this true of) the Word of God, who has actually received as His own peculiar designation the name of Son. But still the tree is not severed from the root, nor the river from the fountain, nor the ray from the sun; nor, indeed, is the Word separated from God. Following, therefore, the form of these analogies, I confess that I call God and His Word- the Father and His Son- two. For the root and the tree are distinctly two things, but correlatively joined; the fountain and the river are also two forms, but indivisible; so likewise the sun and the ray are two forms, but coherent ones. Everything which proceeds from something else must needs be second to that from which it proceeds, without being on that account separated. Where, however, there is a second, there must be two; and where there is a third, there must be three. Now the Spirit indeed is third from God and the Son; just as the fruit of the tree is third from the root, or as the stream out of the river is third from the fountain, or as the apex of the ray is third from the sun. Nothing, however, is alien from that original source whence it derives its own properties. In like manner the Trinity, flowing down from the Father through intertwined and connected steps, does not at all disturb the Monarchy, whilst it at the same time guards the state of the Economy.
Locations 59231-59249). Locations 59249-59251
Tertullian, Against Praxeas, ch.8

{Jn 14:28; Ps 8:5}
I testify that the Father, and the Son, and the Spirit are inseparable from each other, and so will you know in what sense this is said. Now, observe, my assertion is that the Father is one, and the Son one, and the Spirit one, and that They are distinct from Each Other. This statement is taken in a wrong sense by every uneducated as well as every perversely disposed person, as if it predicated a diversity, in such a sense as to imply a separation among the Father, and the Son, and the Spirit. I am, moreover, obliged to say this, when (extolling the Monarchy at the expense of the Economy) they contend for the identity of the Father and Son and Spirit, that it is not by way of diversity that the Son differs from the Father, but by distribution: it is not by division that He is different, but by distinction; because the Father is not the same as the Son, since they differ one from the other in the mode of their being. For the Father is the entire substance, but the Son is a derivation and portion of the whole, as He Himself acknowledges: "My Father is greater than I." In the Psalm His inferiority is described as being "a little lower than the angels." Thus the Father is distinct from the Son, being greater than the Son, inasmuch as He who begets is one, and He who is begotten is another; He, too, who sends is one, and He who is sent is another; and He, again, who makes is one, and He through whom the thing is made is another.
Locations 59254-59264
Tertullian, Against Praxeas, ch.9

{Trinity}
Father; so that He showed a third degree in the Paraclete, as we believe the second degree is in the Son, by reason of the order observed in the Economy.
Locations 59267-59268
Tertullian, Against Praxeas, ch.9

{Jn 1:18; Jn 10:30}
night; nor is the Father the same as the Son, in such a way that Both of them should be One, and One or the Other should be Both,- an opinion which the most conceited "Monarchians" maintain. He Himself, they say, made Himself a Son to Himself. 
Locations 59274-59276
Tertullian, Against Praxeas, ch.10

{Mt 3:17; Heb 1:5; Heb 5:5; Ps 2:7; Acts 13:33}
A father must needs have a son, in order to be a father; so likewise a son, to be a son, must have a father. It is, however, one thing to have, and another thing to be. For instance, in order to be a husband, I must have a wife; I can never myself be my own wife. In like manner, in order to be a father, I have a son, for I never can be a son to myself; and in order to be a son, I have a father, it being impossible for me ever to be my own father.
Locations 59279-59281 Locations 59278-59279
Tertullian, Against Praxeas, ch.10

{Ps 45:1}
that is, (you must prove to me) that the Scriptures show the Son and the Father to be the same, just as on our side the Father and the Son are demonstrated to be distinct; I say distinct, but not separate: for as on my part I produce the words of God Himself, "My heart hath emitted my most excellent Word," so you in like manner ought to adduce in opposition to me some text where God has said, "My heart hath emitted Myself as my own most excellent Word," in such a sense that He is Himself both the Emitter and the Emitted,
Locations 59314-59317
Tertullian, Against Praxeas, ch.11

{Isa 42:1; Isa 49:6; Isa 61:1; Lk 4:18; Ps 71:18; Ps 3:1; Ps 110:1; Isa 53:1-2}
Hear, then, other utterances also of the Father concerning the Son by the mouth of Isaiah: "Behold my Son, whom I have chosen; my beloved, in whom I am well pleased: I will put my Spirit upon Him, and He shall bring forth judgment to the Gentiles." Hear also what He says to the Son: "Is it a great thing for Thee, that Thou shouldest be called my Son to raise up the tribes of Jacob, and to restore the dispersed of Israel? I have given Thee for a light to the Gentiles, that Thou mayest be their salvation to the end of the earth." Hear now also the Son's utterances respecting the Father: "The Spirit of the Lord is upon me, because He hath anointed me to preach the gospel unto men." He speaks of Himself likewise to the Father in the Psalm: "Forsake me not until I have declared the might of Thine arm to all the generation that is to come." Also to the same purport in another Psalm: "O Lord, how are they increased that trouble me!" But almost all the Psalms which prophesy of the person of Christ, represent the Son as conversing with the Father- that is, represent Christ (as speaking) to God. Observe also the Spirit speaking of the Father and the Son, in the character of a third Person: "The Lord said unto my Lord, Sit Thou on my right hand, until I make Thine enemies Thy footstool." Likewise in the words of Isaiah: "Thus saith the Lord to the Lord (*Tertullian reads Kurio instead of, "Cyrus." source) mine Anointed." Likewise, in the same prophet, He says to the Father respecting the Son: "Lord, who hath believed our report, and to whom is the arm of the Lord revealed? We brought a report concerning Him, as if He were a little child, as if He were a root in a dry ground, who had no form nor comeliness."
Locations 59330-59342
Tertullian, Against Praxeas, ch.11

{Acts 16:6-7; Rom 8:26; Jn 3:34}
Still, in these few quotations the distinction of Persons in the Trinity is clearly set forth. For there is the Spirit Himself who speaks, and the Father to whom He speaks, and the Son of whom He speaks.
Locations 59344-59345
Tertullian, Against Praxeas, ch.11

{Gen 1:26-27; Gen 3:22}
If the number of the Trinity also offends you, as if it were not connected in the simple Unity, I ask you how it is possible for a Being who is merely and absolutely One and Singular, to speak in plural phrase, saying, "Let us make man in our own image, and after our own likeness;" whereas He ought to have said, "Let me make man in my own image, and after my own likeness," as being a unique and singular Being? In the following passage, however, "Behold the man is become as one of us," He is either deceiving or amusing us in speaking plurally, if He is One only and singular. Or was it to the angels that He spoke, as the Jews interpret the passage, because these also acknowledge not the Son? Or was it because He was at once the Father, the Son, and the Spirit, that He spoke to Himself in plural terms, making Himself plural on that very account? Nay, it was because He had already His Son close at His side, as a second Person, His own Word, and a third Person also, the Spirit in the Word, that He purposely adopted the plural phrase, "Let us make;" and, "in our image;" and, "become as one of us."
Locations 59349-59357
Tertullian, Against Praxeas, ch.12

{Trinity}
With these did He then speak, in the Unity of the Trinity,
Location 59358
Tertullian, Against Praxeas, ch.12

{Gen 1:3; Jn 1:9}
Why say "image of God?" Why not "His own image" merely, if He was only one who was the Maker, and if there was not also One in whose image He made man? But there was One in whose image God was making man, that is to say, Christ's image, who, being one day about to become Man (more surely and more truly so), had already caused the man to be called His image, who was then going to be formed of clay- the image and similitude of the true and perfect Man. But in respect of the previous works of the world what says the Scripture? Its first statement indeed is made, when the Son has not yet appeared: "And God said, Let there be light, and there was light." Immediately there appears the Word, "that true light, which lighteth man on his coming into the world," and through Him also came light upon the world.
Locations 59362-59365; 59360-59362
Tertullian, Against Praxeas, ch.12

{Jn 1:1}
Now if He too is God, according to John, (who says,) "The Word was God," then you have two Beings- One that commands that the thing be made, and the Other that executes the order and creates. In what sense, however, you ought to understand Him to be another, I have already explained, on the ground of Personality, not of Substance- in the way of distinction, not of division. But although I must everywhere hold one only substance in three coherent and inseparable (Persons), yet I am bound to acknowledge, from the necessity of the case, that He who issues a command is different from Him who executes it.
Locations 59368-59373
Tertullian, Against Praxeas, ch.12

{Ps 45:6-7}
Well then, you reply, if He was God who spoke, and He was also God who created, at this rate, one God spoke and another created; (and thus) two Gods are declared. If you are so venturesome and harsh, reflect a while; and that you may think the better and more deliberately, listen to the psalm in which Two are described as God: "Thy throne, O God, is for ever and ever; the sceptre of Thy kingdom is a sceptre of righteousness. Thou hast loved righteousness, and hated iniquity: therefore God, even Thy God, hath anointed Thee or made Thee His Christ." Now, since He here speaks to God, and affirms that God is anointed by God, He must have affirmed that Two are God, by reason of the sceptre's royal power.
Locations 59378-59382
Tertullian, Against Praxeas, ch.13

{Jn 1:1; Ps 110:1; Isa 53:1; Gen 19:24}
Gospel: "In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was God." There was One "who was," and there was another "with whom" He was. But I find in Scripture the name Lord also applied to them Both: "The Lord said unto my Lord, Sit Thou on my right hand." And Isaiah says this: "Lord, who hath believed our report, and to whom is the arm of the Lord revealed?" Now he would most certainly have said Thine Arm, if he had not wished us to understand that the Father is Lord, and the Son also is Lord. A much more ancient testimony we have also in Genesis: "Then the Lord rained upon Sodom and upon Gomorrah brimstone and fire from the Lord out of heaven."
Locations 59386-59391
Tertullian, Against Praxeas, ch.13

{Ps 82:6}
it is written, "I have said, Ye are gods, and ye are children of the Most High;" and again, "God standeth in the congregation of gods;" in order that, if the Scripture has not been afraid to designate as gods human beings, who have become sons of God by faith, you may be sure that the same Scripture has with greater propriety conferred the name of the Lord on the true and one only Son of God.
Locations 59395-59397
Locations 59394-59395
Tertullian, Against Praxeas, ch.13

{Trinity}
Two Beings are God, the Father and the Son, and, with the addition of the Holy Spirit, even Three, according to the principle of the divine economy, which introduces number, in order that the Father may not, as you perversely infer, be Himself believed to have been born and to have suffered, which it is not lawful to believe, forasmuch as it has not been so handed down. That there are, however, two Gods or two Lords, is a statement which at no time proceeds out of our mouth: not as if it were untrue that the Father is God, and the Son is God, and the Holy Ghost is God, and each is God; but because in earlier times Two were actually spoken of as God, and two as Lord, that when Christ should come He might be both acknowledged as God and designated as Lord, being the Son of Him who is both God and Lord.
Locations 59400-59405
Tertullian, Against Praxeas, ch.13

{Eph 5:8; Jn 12:36,46; Mt 5:14}
the title of Him who is God and Lord was at once restored to the Unity (of the Divine Nature), even because the Gentiles would have to pass from the multitude of their idols to the One Only God, in order that a difference might be distinctly settled between the worshippers of One God and the votaries of polytheism. For it was only right that Christians should shine in the world as "children of light," adoring and invoking Him who is the One God and Lord as "the light of the world." Besides, if, from that perfect knowledge which assures us that the title of God and Lord is suitable both to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost, we were to invoke a plurality of gods and lords, we should quench our torches,
Locations 59412-59416 Locations 59411-59412
Tertullian, Against Praxeas, ch.13

{Rom 1:7; Rom 9:5}
One. I will therefore not speak of gods at all, nor of lords, but I shall follow the apostle; so that if the Father and the Son, are alike to be invoked, I shall call the Father "God," and invoke Jesus Christ as "Lord." But when Christ alone (is mentioned), I shall be able to call Him "God," as the same apostle says: "Of whom is Christ, who is over all, God blessed for ever." For I should give the name of "sun" even to a sunbeam, considered in itself; but if I were mentioning the sun from which the ray emanates, I certainly should at once withdraw the name of sun from the mere beam. For although I make not two suns, still I shall reckon both the sun and its ray to be as much two things and two forms of one undivided substance, as God and His Word, as the Father and the Son. 
Locations 59418-59425
Tertullian, Against Praxeas, ch.13

{Ex 33:20; Heb 1:3; Col 1:15; 1 Tim 1:17; Heb 11:27; Jn 1:18}
the Scripture is false in stating that God said, "If a man see my face, he shall not live." Either way, the Scripture misleads us, when it makes God invisible, and when it produces Him to our sight. Now, then, He must be a different Being who was seen, because of one who was seen it could not be predicated that He is invisible. It will therefore follow, that by Him who is invisible we must understand the Father in the fulness of His majesty, while we recognise the Son as visible by reason of the dispensation of His derived existence; even as it is not permitted us to contemplate the sun, in the full amount of his substance which is in the heavens, but we can only endure with our eyes a ray,
Locations 59432-59437
Tertullian, Against Praxeas, ch.14

{Num 12:6-8; 1 Cor 13:12; Mk 9:4; Mt 17:3; Ex 33:11; Gen 32:30}
the Son also, considered in Himself (as the Son), is invisible, in that He is God, and the Word and Spirit of God; but that He was visible before the days of His flesh, in the way that He says to Aaron and Miriam, "And if there shall be a prophet amongst you, I will make myself known to him in a vision, and will speak to him in a dream; not as with Moses, with whom I shall speak mouth to mouth, even apparently, that is to say, in truth, and not enigmatically," that is to say, in image; as the apostle also expresses it, "Now we see through a glass, darkly (or enigmatically), but then face to face." Since, therefore, He reserves to some future time His presence and speech face to face with Moses- a promise which was afterwards fulfilled in the retirement of the mount (of transfiguration), when as we read in the Gospel, "Moses appeared talking with Jesus"- it is evident that in early times it was always in a glass, (as it were,) and an enigma, in vision and dream, that God, I mean the Son of God, appeared- to the prophets and the patriarchs, as also to Moses indeed himself. And even if the Lord did possibly speak with him face to face, yet it was not as man that he could behold His face, unless indeed it was in a glass, (as it were,) and by enigma. Besides, if the Lord so spake with Moses, that Moses actually discerned His face, eye to eye, how comes it to pass that immediately afterwards, on the same occasion, he desires to see His face, which he ought not to have desired, because he had already seen it? And how, in like manner, does the Lord also say that His face cannot be seen, because He had shown it, if indeed He really had, (as our opponents suppose). Or what is that face of God, the sight of which is refused, if there was one which was visible to man? "I have seen God," says Jacob, "face to face, and my life is preserved." There ought to be some other face which kills if it be only seen. Well, then, was the Son visible? (Certainly not, ) although He was the face of God, except only in vision and dream, and in a glass and enigma, because the Word and Spirit (of God) cannot be seen except in an imaginary form.
Locations 59447-59462
Tertullian, Against Praxeas, ch.14

{Jn 14:28; Lam 4:20; 1 Cor 11:3}
* Lam. iv. 20. Tertullian reads, "Spiritus personæ ejus Christus Dominus." This varies only in the pronoun from the Septuagint, which runs, . According to our A.V., "the breath of our nostrils, the anointed of the Lord" (or, "our anointed Lord"), allusion is made, in the destruction of Jerusalem by the Babylonians, to the capture of the king-the last of David's line, "as an anointed prince." Comp.Jer. lii. 9.(source)
"My Father," says Christ, "is greater than I." Therefore the Father must be the face of the Son. For what does the Scripture say? "The Spirit of His person is Christ the Lord.*" As therefore Christ is the Spirit of the Father's person, there is good reason why, in virtue indeed of the unity, the Spirit of Him to whose person He belonged- that is to say, the Father- pronounced Him to be His "face." Now this, to be sure, is an astonishing thing, that the Father can be taken to be the face of the Son, when He is His head; for "the head of Christ is God." 
Locations 59464-59468
Tertullian, Against Praxeas, ch.14

{Jn 1:18; 1 Tim 6:16; Ex 33:20; Deut 5:26; Judg 13:22; 1 Jn 1:1}
I will take out of the New Testament a confirmation of our view, that you may not straightway attribute to the Father every possible (relation and condition) which I ascribe to the Son. Behold, then, I find both in the Gospels and in the (writings of the) apostles a visible and an invisible God (revealed to us), under a manifest and personal distinction in the condition of both. There is a certain emphatic saying by John: "No man hath seen God at any time;" meaning, of course, at any previous time. But he has indeed taken away all question of time, by saying that God had never been seen. The apostle confirms this statement; for, speaking of God, he says, "Whom no man hath seen, nor can see;" because the man indeed would die who should see Him. But the very same apostles testify that they had both seen and "handled" Christ.
59471-59476
Tertullian, Against Praxeas, ch.15

{Jn 1:14,18}
How, I repeat, can all this be, unless it be that He is one, who anciently was visible only in mystery and enigma, and became more clearly visible by His incarnation, even the Word who was also made flesh; whilst He is another whom no man has seen at any time, being none else than the Father, even Him to whom the Word belongs?
Locations 59482-59484
Tertullian, Against Praxeas, ch.15

{Jn 1:1-2; Jn 1:14,18; 1 Jn 4:12; 1 Jn 1:1}
He came in the flesh, was the "Word in the beginning with God" the Father, and not the Father with the Word. For although the Word was God, yet was He with God, because He is God of God; and being joined to the Father, is with the Father. "And we have seen His glory, the glory as of the only begotten of the Father;" that is, of course, (the glory) of the Son, even Him who was visible, and was glorified by the invisible Father. And therefore, inasmuch as he had said that the Word of God was God, in order that he might give no help to the presumption of the adversary, (which pretended) that he had seen the Father Himself and in order to draw a distinction between the invisible Father and the visible Son, he makes the additional assertion, ex abundanti as it were: "No man hath seen God at any time." What God does he mean? The Word? But he has already said: "Him we have seen and heard, and our hands have handled the Word of life." Well, (I must again ask,) what God does he mean? It is of course the Father, with whom was the Word, the only begotten Son, who is in the bosom of the Father, and has Himself declared Him.
Locations 59486-59494
Tertullian, Against Praxeas, ch.15

{Rom 9:5; 1 Tim 6:16; 1 Tim 1:17; 1 Cor 15:3,8; Acts 22:11; Mt 17:6; Mk 9:6; Ex 33:20; Jn 5:19}
Moreover, he expressly called Christ God, saying: "Of whom are the fathers, and of whom as concerning the flesh Christ came, who is over all, God blessed forever." He shows us also that the Son of God, which is the Word of God, is visible, because He who became flesh was called Christ. Of the Father, however, he says to Timothy: "Whom none among men hath seen, nor indeed can see;" and he accumulates the description in still ampler terms: "Who only hath immortality, and dwelleth in the light which no man can approach unto." It was of Him, too, that he had said in a previous passage: "Now unto the King eternal, immortal, invisible, to the only God;" so that we might apply even the contrary qualities to the Son Himself- mortality, accessibility- of whom the apostle testifies that "He died according to the Scriptures," and that "He was seen by himself last of all,"- by means, of course, of the light which was accessible, although it was not without imperilling his sight that he experienced that light. A like danger to which also befell Peter, and John, and James, (who confronted not the same light) without risking the loss of their reason and mind; and if they, who were unable to endure the glory of the Son, had only seen the Father, they must have died then and there: "For no man shall see God, and live." This being the case, it is evident that He was always seen from the beginning, who became visible in the end; and that He, (on the contrary,) was not seen in the end who had never been visible from the beginning; and that accordingly there are two- the Visible and the Invisible. It was the Son, therefore, who was always seen, and the Son who always conversed with men, and the Son who has always worked by the authority and will of the Father; because "the Son can do nothing of Himself, but what He seeth the Father do"-" do" that is, in His mind and thought. For the Father acts by mind and thought; whilst the Son, who is in the Father's mind and thought, gives effect and form to what He sees.
Locations 59497-59509 Locations 59495-59497
Tertullian, Against Praxeas, ch.15

{Col 1:16-17; Jn 3:35; Jn 1:3; Rom 11:36; 1 Cor 8:6}
But you must not suppose that only the works which relate to the (creation of the) world were made by the Son, but also whatsoever since that time has been done by God.
Locations 59512-59513
Tertullian, Against Praxeas, ch.16

{Jn 1:1; Mt 28:18; Jn 5:22}
Whence it is written, "From the beginning the Word was with God, and the Word was God;" to whom "is given by the Father all power in heaven and on earth." "The Father judgeth no man, but hath committed all judgment to the Son"- from the very beginning even. For when He speaks of all power and all judgment, and says that all things were made by Him, and all things have been delivered into His hand, He allows no exception (in respect) of time, because they would not be all things unless they were the things of all time. It is the Son, therefore, who has been from the beginning administering judgment, throwing down the haughty tower, and dividing the tongues, punishing the whole world by the violence of waters, raining upon Sodom and Gomorrah fire and brimstone, as the Lord from the Lord. For He it was who at all times came down to hold converse with men, from Adam on to the patriarchs and the prophets, in vision, in dream, in mirror, in dark saying; ever from the beginning laying the foundation of the course of His dispensations, which He meant to follow out to the very last.
Locations 59514-59521
Tertullian, Against Praxeas, ch.16

{1 Cor 10:11; Gen 3:9; Ps 8:6}
that we might the more readily believe that the Son of God had come down into the world, if we knew that in times past also something similar had been done. For as it was on our account and for our learning that these events are described in the Scriptures, so for our sakes also were they done-( even ours, I say), "upon whom the ends of the world are come." In this way it was that even then He knew full well what human feelings and affections were, intending as He always did to take upon Him man's actual component substances, body and soul, making inquiry of Adam (as if He were ignorant), "Where art thou, Adam?"- repenting that He had made man, as if He had lacked foresight; tempting Abraham, as if ignorant of what was in man; offended with persons, and then reconciled to them; and whatever other (weaknesses and imperfections) the heretics lay hold of (in their assumptions) as unworthy of God, in order to discredit the Creator, not considering that these circumstances are suitable enough for the Son, who was one day to experience even human sufferings- hunger and thirst, and tears, and actual birth and real death, and in respect of such a dispensation "made by the Father a little less than the angels."
Locations 59530-59531). Locations 59523-59530
Tertullian, Against Praxeas, ch.16

{1 Tim 6:16; Acts 17:24; Joel 2:10; Ps 18:7; Ps 97:5; Isa 10:14; Isa 66:1; Isa 40:28}
the Almighty Invisible God, "whom no man hath seen nor can see; He who dwelleth in light unapproachable;" "He who dwelleth not in temples made with hands;" "from before whose sight the earth trembles, and the mountains melt like wax;" who holdeth the whole world in His hand "like a nest;" "whose throne is heaven, and earth His footstool;" in whom is every place, but Himself is in no place; who is the utmost bound of the universe;- how happens it, I say, that He (who, though) the Most High, should yet have walked in paradise towards the cool of the evening, in quest of Adam; and should have shut up the ark after Noah had entered it; and at Abraham's tent should have refreshed Himself under an oak; and have called to Moses out of the burning bush; and have appeared as "the fourth" in the furnace of the Babylonian monarch (although He is there called the Son of man),- unless all these events had happened as an image, as a mirror, as an enigma (of the future incarnation)? Surely even these things could not have been believed even of the Son of God, unless they had been given us in the Scriptures; possibly also they could not have been believed of the Father, even if they had been given in the Scriptures, since these men bring Him down into Mary's womb, and set Him before Pilate's judgment-seat, and bury Him in the sepulchre of Joseph. Hence, therefore, their error becomes manifest; for, being ignorant that the entire order of the divine administration has from the very first had its course through the agency of the Son, they believe that the Father Himself was actually seen, and held converse with men, and worked, and was athirst, and suffered hunger
Locations 59535-59546
Tertullian, Against Praxeas, ch.16

{Jn 16:15; Acts 2:22; Rev 1:8}
And as for the Father's names, God Almighty, the Most High, the Lord of hosts, the King of Israel, the "One that is," we say (for so much do the Scriptures teach us) that they belonged suitably to the Son also, and that the Son came under these designations, and has always acted in them, and has thus manifested them in Himself to men. "All things," says He, "which the Father hath are mine." Then why not His names also? When, therefore, you read of Almighty God, and the Most High, and the God of hosts, and the King of Israel, the "One that is," consider whether the Son also be not indicated by these designations, who in His own right is God Almighty, in that He is the Word of Almighty God, and has received power over all; is the Most High, in that He is "exalted at the right hand of God," as Peter declares in the Acts; is the Lord of hosts, because all things are by the Father made subject to Him; is the King of Israel because to Him has especially been committed the destiny of that nation; and is likewise "the One that is," because there are many who are called Sons, but are not. As to the point maintained by them, that the name of Christ belongs also to the Father, they shall hear (what I have to say) in the proper place. Meanwhile, let this be my immediate answer to the argument which they adduce from the Revelation of John: "I am the Lord which is, and which was, and which is to come, the Almighty;" and from all other passages which in their opinion make the designation of Almighty God unsuitable to the Son. As if, indeed, He which is to come were not almighty; whereas even the Son of the Almighty is as much almighty as the Son of God is God. 
Locations 59563-59566). Locations 59553-59563
Tertullian, Against Praxeas, ch.17

{Heresy; Trinity}
But what hinders them from readily perceiving this community of the Father's titles in the Son, is the statement of Scripture, whenever it determines God to be but One; as if the selfsame Scripture had not also set forth Two both as God and Lord, as we have shown above. Their argument is: Since we find Two and One, therefore Both are One and the Same, both Father and Son.
Locations 59567-59570
Tertullian, Against Praxeas, ch.18

{1 Cor 8:4,6; Deut 4:35, 39; Deut 6:4; Isa 45:5,18; Isa 44:6; Isa 44:24}
For, without any detriment to the Son, it is quite possible for it to have rightly determined that God is only One, to whom the Son belongs; since He who has a Son ceases not on that account to exist,- Himself being One only, that is, on His own account, whenever He is named without the Son. And He is named without the Son whensoever He is defined as the principle (of Deity) in the character of "its first Person," which had to be mentioned before the name of the Son; because it is the Father who is acknowledged in the first place, and after the Father the Son is named. Therefore "there is one God," the Father, "and without Him there is none else." And when He Himself makes this declaration, He denies not the Son, but says that there is no other God; and the Son is not different from the Father. Indeed, if you only look carefully at the contexts which follow such statements as this, you will find that they nearly always have distinct reference to the makers of idols and the worshippers thereof, with a view to the multitude of false gods being expelled by the unity of the Godhead, which nevertheless has a Son; and inasmuch as this Son is undivided and inseparable from the Father, so is He to be reckoned as being in the Father, even when He is not named. The fact is, if He had named Him expressly, He would have separated Him, saying in so many words: "Beside me there is none else, except my Son." In short He would have made His Son actually another, after excepting Him from others. Suppose the sun to say, "I am the Sun, and there is none other besides me, except my ray," would you not have remarked how useless was such a statement, as if the ray were not itself reckoned in the sun? He says, then, that there is no God besides Himself in respect of the idolatry both of the Gentiles as well as of Israel; nay, even on account of our heretics also, who fabricate idols with their words, just as the heathen do with their hands; that is to say, they make another God and another Christ. When, therefore, He attested His own unity, the Father took care of the Son's interests, that Christ should not be supposed to have come from another God, but from Him who had already said, "I am God and there is none other beside me," who shows us that He is the only God, but in company with His Son, with whom "He stretcheth out the heavens alone." 
Locations 59578-59589). Locations 59572-59578
Tertullian, Against Praxeas, ch.18

{Prov 8:27; Rom 11:34; Prov 8:30}
how is it that these heretics assume their position so perversely, as to render inadmissible the singleness of that Wisdom which says, "When He prepared the heaven, I was present with Him?"- even though the apostle asks, "Who hath known the mind of the Lord, or who hath been His counsellor?" meaning, of course, to except that wisdom which was present with Him. In Him, at any rate, and with Him, did (Wisdom) construct the universe, He not being ignorant of what she was making. 
Locations 59595-59598
Tertullian, Against Praxeas, ch.19

{Isa 44:24; Ps 33:6; Isa 41:4 [LXX]; Jn 1:1}
meaning alone with His Son, even as He is one with His Son. The utterance, therefore, will be in like manner the Son's, "I have stretched out the heavens alone," because by the Word were the heavens established. Inasmuch, then, as the heaven was prepared when Wisdom was present in the Word, and since all things were made by the Word, it is quite correct to say that even the Son stretched out the heaven alone, because He alone ministered to the Father's work. It must also be He who says, "I am the First, and to all futurity I AM." The Word, no doubt, was before all things. "In the beginning was the Word;" and in that beginning He was sent forth by the Father. The Father, however, has no beginning, as proceeding from none; nor can He be seen, since He was not begotten. He who has always been alone could never have had order or rank. Therefore, if they have determined that the Father and the Son must be regarded as one and the same, for the express purpose of vindicating the unity of God, that unity of His is preserved intact; for He is one, and yet He has a Son, who is equally with Himself comprehended in the same Scriptures.
Locations 59610-59616). Locations 59609-59610
Tertullian, Against Praxeas, ch.19

{1 Cor 8:6}
why they are not said to be two Gods and two Lords, but that they are two as Father and Son; and this not by severance of their substance, but from the dispensation wherein we declare the Son to be undivided and inseparable from the Father,- distinct in degree, not in state. And although, when named apart, He is called God, He does not thereby constitute two Gods, but one; and that from the very circumstance that He is entitled to be called God, from His union with the Father. 
Locations 59618-59622
Tertullian, Against Praxeas, ch.19

{Isa 45:5; Jn 10:30; Jn 14:9-10}
For as in the Old Testament Scriptures they lay hold of nothing else than, "I am God, and beside me there is no God;" so in the Gospel they simply keep in view the Lord's answer to Philip, "I and my Father are one;" and, "He that hath seen me hath seen the Father; and I am in the Father, and the Father in me." They would have the entire revelation of both Testaments yield to these three passages, whereas the only proper course is to understand the few statements in the light of the many. But in their contention they only act on the principle of all heretics. For, inasmuch as only a few testimonies are to be found (making for them) in the general mass, they pertinaciously set off the few against the many, and assume the later against the earlier. The rule, however, which has been from the beginning established for every case, gives its prescription against the later assumptions, as indeed it also does against the fewer.
Locations 59626-59634
Tertullian, Against Praxeas, ch.20

{Jn 1:1-3}
written, there is without doubt shown to be One who was from the beginning, and also One with whom He always was: one the Word of God, the other God (although the Word is also God, but God regarded as the Son of God, not as the Father); One through whom were all things, Another by whom were all things.
Locations 59638-59640
Tertullian, Against Praxeas, ch.21

{Jn 1:14}
He, therefore, who became flesh was not the very same as He from whom the Word came. "His glory was beheld- the glory as of the only-begotten of the Father;" not, (observe,) as of the Father.  Locations 59642-59643
Tertullian, Against Praxeas, ch.21

{Jn 2:16}
When He entered the temple, He called it "His Father's house," speaking as the Son.
Location 59652
Tertullian, Against Praxeas, ch.21

{Jn 4:34; Jn 5:17}
He says, therefore," My meat is to do the will of Him that sent me, and to finish His work;" whilst to the Jews He remarks respecting the cure of the impotent man, "My Father worketh hitherto, and I work." "My Father and I"- these are the Son's words.
Locations 59659-59661
Tertullian, Against Praxeas, ch.21

{Jn 5:36-37; Jn 5:43}
And the Father Himself, which hath sent me, hath also borne witness of me." But He at once adds, "Ye have neither heard His voice at any time, nor seen His shape;" thus affirming that in former times it was not the Father, but the Son, who used to be seen and heard. Then He says at last: "I am come in my Father's name, and ye have not received me." It was therefore always the Son (of whom we read) under the designation of the Almighty and Most High God, and King, and Lord.
Locations 59672-59676
Tertullian, Against Praxeas, ch.21

{Jn 6:68}
what was Simon Peter's answer? "To whom shall we go? Thou hast the words of eternal life, and we believe that Thou art the Christ." (Tell me now, did they believe) Him to be the Father, or the Christ of the Father? 
Locations 59683-59685
Tertullian, Against Praxeas, ch.21

{Jn 8:16,18}
He did not say, Because I myself am He; and, I have sent mine own self: but His words are, "He hath sent me."
Locations 59689-59690
Tertullian, Against Praxeas, ch.22

{Jn 8:18,19; Jer 1:9; Isa 50:4}
"I am one who am bearing witness of myself; and the Father (is another,) who hath sent me, and beareth witness of me." Now, if He were one- being at once both the Son and the Father- He certainly would not have quoted the sanction of the law, which requires not the testimony of one, but of two.. . . although they ought certainly to have known that the Father's words were uttered in the Son, because they read in Jeremiah, "And the Lord said to me, Behold, I have put my words in thy mouth;" and again in Isaiah, "The Lord hath given to me the tongue of learning that I should understand when to speak a word in season."
Locations 59693-59703
Tertullian, Against Praxeas, ch.22

{Trinity}
but His coming out from God is like the ray's procession from the sun, and the river's from the fountain, and the tree's from the seed);
Locations 59709-59710). Location 59709
Tertullian, Against Praxeas, ch.22

{Jn 9:4}
In like manner He declares, in the case of the man born blind, "that He must do the works of the Father which had sent Him;"
Locations 59713-59714
Tertullian, Against Praxeas, ch.22

{Jn 10:24-30,32; Jn 10:34-38}
When He was asked by the Jews if He were the very Christ (meaning, of course, the Christ of God; for to this day the Jews expect not the Father Himself, but the Christ of God, it being nowhere said that the Father will come as the Christ), He said to them, "I am telling you, and yet ye do not believe: the works which I am doing, in my Father's name, they actually bear witness of me." Witness of what? Of that very thing, to be sure, of which they were making inquiry- whether He were the Christ of God. Then, again, concerning His sheep, and (the assurance) that no man should pluck them out of His hand, He says, "My Father, which gave them to me, is greater than all;" adding immediately, "I am and my Father are one." Here, then, they take their stand, too infatuated, nay, too blind, to see in the first place that there is in this passage an intimation of Two Beings-" I and my Father;" then that there is a plural predicate, "are," inapplicable to one person only; and lastly, that (the predicate terminates in an abstract, not a personal noun)-" we are one thing" Unum, not "one person" Unus. For if He had said "one Person," He might have rendered some assistance to their opinion. Unus, no doubt, indicates the singular number; but (here we have a case where) "Two" are still the subject in the masculine gender. He accordingly says Unum, a neuter term, which does not imply singularity of number, but unity of essence, likeness, conjunction, affection on the Father's part, who loves the Son, and submission on the Son's, who obeys the Father's will. When He says, "I and my Father are one" in essence- Unum- He shows that there are Two, whom He puts on an equality and unites in one. He therefore adds to this very statement, that He "had showed them many works from the Father," for none of which did He deserve to be stoned. And to prevent their thinking Him deserving of this fate, as if He had claimed to be considered as God Himself, that is, the Father, by having said, "I and my Father are One," representing Himself as the Father's divine Son, and not as God Himself, He says, "If it is written in your law, I said, Ye are gods; and if the Scripture cannot be broken, say ye of Him whom the Father hath sanctified and sent into the world, that He blasphemeth, because He said, I am the Son of God? If I do not the works of my Father, believe me not; but if I do, even if ye will not believe me, still believe the works; and know that I am in the Father, and the Father in me." It must therefore be by the works that the Father is in the Son, and the Son in the Father; and so it is by the works that we understand that the Father is one with the Son.
Locations 59727-59736). Locations 59717-59727
Tertullian, Against Praxeas, ch.22

{Jer 23:24; Col 1:17; Heb 5:7; Mt 26:39, 42,44; Mk 14:36, 39; Lk 22:41,44}
You have the Son on earth, you have the Father in heaven. Now this is not a separation; it is nothing but the divine dispensation. We know, however, that God is in the bottomless depths, and exists everywhere; but then it is by power and authority. We are also sure that the Son, being indivisible from Him, is everywhere with Him. Nevertheless, in the Economy or Dispensation itself, the Father willed that the Son should be regarded as on earth, and Himself in heaven; whither the Son also Himself looked up, and prayed, and made supplication of the Father;
Locations 59749-59752
Tertullian, Against Praxeas, ch.23

{Jn 12:45,49; Isa 50:4}
"And he that seeth me, seeth Him that sent me." How so? Even because, (as He afterwards declares,) "I have not spoken from myself, but the Father which sent me: He hath given me a commandment what I should say, and what I should speak." For "the Lord God hath given me the tongue of the learned, that I should know when I ought to speak" the word which I actually speak.
Locations 59765-59767
Tertullian, Against Praxeas, ch.23

{Heresy; Trinity; Sabellianism}
Praxeas, however, would have it that it was the Father who proceeded forth from Himself, and had returned to Himself;
Location 59770
Tertullian, Against Praxeas, ch.23

{Jn 14:9; Jn 10:30; Jn 16:28; Jn 14:6; Jn 6:44; Mt 11:27; Jn 5:21; Jn 14:7; Ex 33:20}
And now it may be seen in what sense it was said, "He that hath seen me hath seen the Father,"- even in the same in which it was said in a previous passage, "I and my Father are one." Wherefore? Because "I came forth from the Father, and am come into the world" and, "I am the way: no man cometh unto the Father, but by me;" and, "No man can come to me, except the Father draw him;" and, "All things are delivered unto me by the Father;" and, "As the Father quickeneth (the dead), so also doth the Son;" and again, "If ye had known me, ye would have known the Father also." For in all these passages He had shown Himself to be the Father's Commissioner, through whose agency even the Father could be seen in His works, and heard in His words, and recognised in the Son's administration of the Father's words and deeds. The Father indeed was invisible, as Philip had learnt in the law, and ought at the moment to have remembered: "No man shall see God, and live." So he is reproved for desiring to see the Father, as if He were a visible Being, and is taught that He only becomes visible in the Son from His mighty works, and not in the manifestation of His person.
Locations 59794-59802
Tertullian, Against Praxeas, ch.24

{Jn 14:16; Jn 16:14}
Then there is the Paraclete or Comforter, also, which He promises to pray for to the Father, and to send from heaven after He had ascended to the Father. He is called "another Comforter," indeed; but in what way He is another we have already shown, "He shall receive of mine," says Christ, just as Christ Himself received of the Father's. Thus the connection of the Father in the Son, and of the Son in the Paraclete, produces three coherent Persons, who are yet distinct One from Another. These Three are one essence, not one Person,
Locations 59820-59824
Tertullian, Against Praxeas, ch.25

{Mt 27:46; Lk 23:46}
We have, moreover, in that other Gospel a clear revelation, i.e. of the Son's distinction from the Father, "My God, why hast Thou forsaken me?" and again, (in the third Gospel,) "Father, into Thy hands I commend my spirit."
Locations 59827-59829
Tertullian, Against Praxeas, ch.25

{Lk 1:35}
in express terms by the angel himself as the Son of God: "The Spirit of God shall come upon thee, and the power of the Highest shall overshadow thee; therefore also the Holy Thing that shall be born of thee shall be called the Son of God."
Locations 59845-59847
Tertullian, Against Praxeas, ch.26

{Lk 1:35; Jn 1:14}
Now, by saying "the Spirit of God" (although the Spirit of God is God,) and by not directly naming God, he wished that portion of the whole Godhead to be understood, which was about to retire into the designation of "the Son." The Spirit of God in this passage must be the same as the Word. For just as, when John says, "The Word was made flesh," we understand the Spirit also in the mention of the Word:
Locations 59849-59852
Tertullian, Against Praxeas, ch.26


{Lk 1:35; Jn 16:13-15}
Now that which is God of God, although He is an actually existing thing, yet He cannot be God Himself (exclusively), but so far God as He is of the same substance as God Himself, and as being an actually existing thing, and as a portion of the Whole. Much more will "the power of the Highest" not be the Highest Himself, because It is not an actually existing thing, as being Spirit- in the same way as the wisdom (of God) and the providence (of God) is not God: these attributes are not substances, but the accidents of the particular substance.
Locations 59860-59863). Locations 59859-59860
Tertullian, Against Praxeas, ch.26

{Mt 10:32-33; Mt 21:33-41; Mt 24:36; Lk 22:29; Mt 26:53; Mt 27:46; Lk 23:46; Lk 24:49}
He will confess those who confess Him, and deny those who deny Him, before His Father. He also introduces a parable of the mission to the vineyard of the Son (not the Father), who was sent after so many servants, and slain by the husbandmen, and avenged by the Father. He is also ignorant of the last day and hour, which is known to the Father only. He awards the kingdom to His disciples, as He says it had been appointed to Himself by the Father. He has power to ask, if He will, legions of angels from the Father for His help. He exclaims that God had forsaken Him. He commends His spirit into the hands of the Father. After His resurrection He promises in a pledge to His disciples that He will send them the promise of His Father; and lastly, He commands them to baptize into the Father and the Son and the Holy Ghost, not into a unipersonal God. And indeed it is not once only, but three times, that we are immersed into the Three Persons, at each several mention of Their names.  Locations 59870-59876
Tertullian, Against Praxeas, ch.26

{Ps 87:5}
the psalm also says, "Since God became man in the midst of it, and established it by the will of the Father." Now what Divine Person was born in it? The Word, and the Spirit which became incarnate with the Word by the will of the Father.
Locations 59895-59897
Tertullian, Against Praxeas, ch.27

{Ps 87:5; Jn 1:1-2; Rom 1:3}
either. But the truth is, we find that He is expressly set forth as both God and Man; the very psalm which we have quoted intimating (of the flesh), that "God became Man in the midst of it, He therefore established it by the will of the Father,"- certainly in all respects as the Son of God and the Son of Man, being God and Man, differing no doubt according to each substance in its own especial property, inasmuch as the Word is nothing else but God, and the flesh nothing else but Man.
Locations 59910-59912
Locations 59909-59910
Tertullian, Against Praxeas, ch.27

{Rom 1:4; Mt 4:2; Jn 4:6-7; Jn 11:35; Jn 12:27; Mt 26:38}
We see plainly the twofold state, which is not confounded, but conjoined in One Person- Jesus, God and Man. Concerning Christ, indeed, I defer what I have to say. (I remark here), that the property of each nature is so wholly preserved, that the Spirit on the one hand did all things in Jesus suitable to Itself, such as miracles, and mighty deeds, and wonders; and the Flesh, on the other hand, exhibited the affections which belong to it. It was hungry under the devil's temptation, thirsty with the Samaritan woman, wept over Lazarus, was troubled even unto death,
Locations 59914-59918
Tertullian, Against Praxeas, ch.27

{Jn 3:6; Lk 1:35; 1 Tim 2:5}
mortal. Forasmuch, however, as the two substances acted distinctly, each in its own character, there necessarily accrued to them severally their own operations, and their own issues. Learn then, together with Nicodemus, that "that which is born in the flesh is flesh, and that which is born of the Spirit is Spirit." Neither the flesh becomes Spirit, nor the Spirit flesh. In one Person they no doubt are well able to be co-existent. Of them Jesus consists- Man, of the flesh; of the Spirit, God- and the angel designated Him as "the Son of God," in respect of that nature, in which He was Spirit, reserving for the flesh the appellation "Son of Man." In like manner, again, the apostle calls Him "the Mediator between God and Men," and so affirmed His participation of both substances. Now,
Location 59928
Locations 59922-59928
Tertullian, Against Praxeas, ch.27

{Acts 2:36; Mt 2:4}
Strong's 5547  (from 5548 /, "anoint with olive oil") - properly, "the Anointed One," the Christ (Hebrew, "Messiah"). (source)
if indeed Christ is a name, and not rather a surname, or designation; for it signifies "Anointed." But Anointed is no more a proper name than Clothed
Locations 59934-59935
Tertullian, Against Praxeas, ch.28

{Acts 4:27}
But we learn no such fact from the Acts of the Apostles in that ejaculation of the Church to God, "Of a truth, Lord, against Thy Holy Child Jesus, whom Thou hast anointed, both Herod and Pontius Pilate with the Gentiles and the people of Israel were gathered together."
Locations 59939-59941
Tertullian, Against Praxeas, ch.28

{Acts 2:36}
"Let all the house of Israel know assuredly that God hath made that same Jesus, whom ye have crucified, both Lord and Christ," that is, Anointed.
Location 59943
Locations 59942-59943
Tertullian, Against Praxeas, ch.28

{Jn 20:17; Amos 4:13 [LXX]}
For if Christ is God the Father, when He says, "I ascend unto my Father and your Father, and to my God and your God," He of course shows plainly enough that there is above Himself another Father and another God. If, again, the Father is Christ, He must be some other Being who "strengtheneth the thunder, and createth the wind, and declareth unto men His Christ."
Locations 59955-59958
Tertullian, Against Praxeas, ch.28

{Isa 45:1; Eph 1:17; Rom 8:11}
*  Here Tertullian reads , instead of , "to Cyrus," in Isa. xlv. 1.(source)
And if, to quote another passage, "Thus saith the Lord to my Lord Christ,*" the Lord who speaks to the Father of Christ must be a distinct Being. Moreover, when the apostle in his epistle prays, "That the God of our Lord Jesus Christ may give unto you the spirit of wisdom and of knowledge," He must be other (than Christ), who is the God of Jesus Christ, the bestower of spiritual gifts. And once for all, that we may not wander through every passage, He "who raised up Christ from the dead, and is also to raise up our mortal bodies,"
Locations 59961-59963
Locations 59959-59961
Tertullian, Against Praxeas, ch.28

{1 Cor 15:3; Rom 1:3-4}
Now, although when two substances are alleged to be in Christ- namely, the divine and the human- it plainly follows that the divine nature is immortal, and that which is human is mortal, it is manifest in what sense he declares "Christ died"- even in the sense in which He was flesh and Man and the Son of Man, not as being the Spirit and the Word and the Son of God.
Locations 59969-59972
Tertullian, Against Praxeas, ch.29

{Gal 3:13; Deut 21:23}
for we do not maintain that He died after the divine nature, but only after the human. Nay, but you do blaspheme; because you allege not only that the Father died, but that He died the death of the cross. For "cursed are they which are hanged on a tree,"- a curse which, after the law, is compatible to the Son (inasmuch as "Christ has been made a curse for us," but certainly not the Father); since, however, you convert Christ into the Father, you are chargeable with blasphemy against the Father. But when we assert that Christ was crucified, we do not malign Him with a curse; we only re-affirm the curse pronounced by the law:
Locations 59977-59979
Locations 59974-59977
Tertullian, Against Praxeas, ch.29

{Phil 2:6-8}
Well, but how could the Son suffer, if the Father did not suffer with Him? My answer is, The Father is separate from the Son, though not from Him as God. For even if a river be soiled with mire and mud, although it flows from the fountain identical in nature with it, and is not separated from the fountain, yet the injury which affects the stream reaches not to the fountain; and although it is the water of the fountain which suffers down the stream, still, since it is not affected at the fountain, but only in the river, the fountain suffers nothing, but only the river which issues from the fountain. So likewise the Spirit of God, whatever suffering it might be capable of in the Son, yet, inasmuch as it could not suffer in the Father, the fountain of the Godhead, but only in the Son, it evidently could not have suffered, as the Father. But it is enough for me that the Spirit of God suffered nothing as the Spirit of God, since all that It suffered It suffered in the Son.
Locations 59987-59994
Tertullian, Against Praxeas, ch.29

{Mt 27:46}
You have Him exclaiming in the midst of His passion: "My God, my God, why hast Thou forsaken me?"
Locations 60001-60002
Tertullian, Against Praxeas, ch.30

{Mt 27:46; Rom 8:32; Isa 53:5-6}
But this was the voice of flesh and soul, that is to say, of man- not of the Word and Spirit, that is to say, not of God; and it was uttered so as to prove the impassibility of God, who "forsook" His Son, so far as He handed over His human substance to the suffering of death. This verity the apostle also perceived, when he writes to this effect: "If the Father spared not His own Son." This did Isaiah before him likewise perceive, when he declared: "And the Lord hath delivered Him up for our offences." In this manner He "forsook" Him, in not sparing Him; "forsook" Him, in delivering Him up.
Locations 60004-60008
Tertullian, Against Praxeas, ch.30

{Acts 7:55; Ps 110:1; Acts 1:11; Lk 21:37}
He is seen by Stephen, at his martyrdom by stoning, still sitting at the right hand of God where He will continue to sit, until the Father shall make His enemies His footstool. He will come again on the clouds of heaven, just as He appeared when He ascended into heaven. Meanwhile He has received from the Father the promised gift, and has shed it forth, even the Holy Spirit- the Third Name in the Godhead, and the Third Degree of the Divine Majesty; the Declarer of the One Monarchy of God,
Locations 60012-60015
Tertullian, Against Praxeas, ch.30

{Heb 1:1-2; Lk 16:16; Mt 11:13; Rom 1:4}
But, (this doctrine of yours bears a likeness) to the Jewish faith, of which this is the substance- so to believe in One God as to refuse to reckon the Son besides Him, and after the Son the Spirit. Now, what difference would there be between us and them, if there were not this distinction which you are for breaking down? What need would there be of the gospel, which is the substance of the New Covenant, laying down (as it does) that the Law and the Prophets lasted until John the Baptist, if thenceforward the Father, the Son, and the Spirit are not both believed in as Three, and as making One Only God? God was pleased to renew His covenant with man in such a way as that His Unity might be believed in, after a new manner, through the Son and the Spirit, in order that God might now be known openly, in His proper Names and Persons, who in ancient times was not plainly understood, though declared through the Son and the Spirit.
Locations 60019-60026
Tertullian, Against Praxeas, ch.31

{Deut 4:35; Deut 4:39; Deut 6:4; 1 Cor 8:6; Relationship of the Father and Son}
Location 49540
But the Christian verity has distinctly declared this principle, "God is not, if He is not one;"
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.1, ch.3

{Ps 90:2; Ps 8:22-25; Ps 93:2; Relationship of the Father and Son}
Location 49542
So far as a human being can form a definition of God, I adduce one which the conscience of all men will also acknowledge,- that God is the great Supreme existing in eternity, unbegotten, unmade without beginning, without end. For such a condition as this must needs be ascribed to that eternity which makes God to be the great Supreme,
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.1, ch.3

{Isa 46:9; Isa 44:6; Relationship of the Father and Son}
Location 49548
what must be the condition of the great Supreme Himself? Surely it must be that nothing is equal to Him, i.e. that there is no other great supreme; because, if there were, He would have an equal; and if He had an equal, He would be no longer the great Supreme,
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.1, ch.3

{Isa 46:9; Relationship of the Father and Son}
Location 49550
That Being, then, which is the great Supreme, must needs be unique, by having no equal, and so not ceasing to be the great Supreme.
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.1, ch.3

{Isa 46:9; Relationship of the Father and Son}
Location 49555
and not otherwise the great Supreme than as having no equal; and not otherwise having no equal than as being Unique.
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.1, ch.3

{Isa 46:9; Isa 44:6; Relationship of the Father and Son}
Location 49557
How, therefore, can two great Supremes co-exist, when this is the attribute of the Supreme Being, to have no equal
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.1, ch.3

{Deut 4:35; Deut 4:39; Deut 6:4; 1 Cor 8:6; Relationship of the Father and Son}
Location 49558
belongs to One alone, and can by no means exist in two?
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.1, ch.3

{Deut 4:35; Deut 4:39; Deut 6:4; 1 Cor 8:6; Jn 10:30; Relationship of the Father and Son}
Location 49596
For consider now, if, when I saw two Gods before me (who, being both Supreme Beings, were equal to each other), I were to worship them both, what should I be doing?
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.1, ch.5

{Jn 10:30; Jn 17:21-23; Relationship of the Father and Son; Jn 10:30; Jn 17:21-23}
Location 49598
[If there were two equals], as both of them are so equal and are both included in either of the two, I might serve them both acceptably in only one; and by this very means I should attest their equality and unity, provided that I worshipped them mutually the one in the other, because in the one both are present to me. ... I should be equally conscious of seeming to pour contempt on the uselessness of a numerical distinction, which was superfluous, because it indicated no difference;
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.1, ch.5

{Jn 10:30; Deut 4:35; Deut 4:39; Deut 6:4; 1 Cor 8:6; Relationship of the Father and Son}
Location 49605
maintaining that God ought to be believed as the one only great Supreme Being, excluding from Him every possibility of equality, we have treated of these topics on the assumption of two equal Gods; but nevertheless, by teaching that no equals can exist according to the Law of the Supreme Being, we have sufficiently affirmed the impossibility that two equals should exist.
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.1, ch.6

{Gnosticism; Ps 82:1; Ps 82:6}
Location 49627
its author fails to consider that quite as strong an objection might be urged against the (superior) god of Marcion: he too is called god, but is not on that account proved to be divine, as neither are angels nor men, the Creator's handiwork.
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.1, ch.7

{Titus 3:5; Acts 2:38}
Location 50181
For what end does baptism serve, according to him? If the remission of sins, how will he make it evident that he remits sins, when he affords no evidence that he retains them?
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.1, ch.28

{Rom 6:4; Gen 2:7; Jn 3:5; Baptism}
Location 50184
If [baptism is for] the regeneration of man, how can he regenerate, who has never generated? For the repetition of an act is impossible to him, by whom nothing any time has been ever done. If the bestowal of the Holy Ghost, how will he bestow the Spirit, who did not at first impart the life?
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.1, ch.28

{1 Tim 4:1-5; Marcion}
Location 50194
The flesh is not, according to Marcion, immersed in the water of the sacrament, unless it be in virginity, widowhood, or celibacy, or has purchased by divorce a title to baptism,
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.1, ch.29

{Gen 2:16-17}
Location 50305
The Blessings of Man's Free-Will
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.2, ch.4

{Ps 45:1; Relationship of the Father and Son}
Location 50310
In this good work God employs a most excellent minister, even His own Word. "My heart," He says, "hath emitted my most excellent Word."
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.2, ch.4

{Gen 2:7}
Location 50321
Goodness breathed into him a soul, not dead, but living.
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.2, ch.4

{Gen 2:18; Eph 5:25-27; Gal 4:26-27; Rev 21:2}
Location 50324
For, said He, that the man be alone is not good. He knew full well what a blessing to him would be the sex of Mary, and also of the Church.
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.2, ch.4

{Gen 3:1-7; Jas 1:13-15; Free Will; God's Foreknowledge}
Location 50339
These are the bones of contention, which you are perpetually gnawing! If God is good, and prescient of the future, and able to avert evil, why did He permit man, the very image and likeness of Himself, and, by the origin of his soul, His own substance too, to be deceived by the devil, and fall from obedience of the Law into death?
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.2, ch.5

{Rom 4:17; Isa 45:18}
Location 50347
The Creator's works testify at once to His goodness, since they are good, as we have shown, and to His power, since they are mighty, and spring indeed out of nothing. And even if they were made out of some (previous) matter, as some will have it, they are even thus out of nothing, because they were not what they are.
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.2, ch.5

{Free will; Gen 4:7; Gal 6:8}
Location 50355
I find, then, that man was by God constituted free, master of his own will and power; indicating the presence of God's image and likeness in him by nothing so well as by this constitution of his nature.
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.2, ch.5

{Free will; Gen 2:7}
Location 50358
but he showed his stamp in that essence which he derived from God Himself (that is, the spiritual, which answered to the form of God), and in the freedom and power of his will.
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.2, ch.5

{Rom 6:23; Free Will}
Location 50360
nor again, would the penalty of death be threatened against sin, if a contempt of the Law were impossible to man in the liberty of his will.
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.2, ch.5

{Free will; Deut 30:19; Gen 2:16-17}
Location 50361
So in the Creator's subsequent laws also you will find, when He sets before man good and evil, life and death, that the entire course of discipline is arranged in precepts by God's calling men from sin, and threatening and exhorting them; and this on no other ground than that man is free, with a will either for obedience or resistance.
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.2, ch.5

{Free will}
Location 50368
that you may not object, even now, that he ought not to have been so constituted, since his liberty and power of will might turn out to be injurious, I will first of all maintain that he was rightly so constituted, that I may with the greater confidence commend both his actual constitution, and the additional fact of its being worthy of the Divine Being;
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.2, ch.6

{Free will; Gen 1:27; Mt 19:17}
Location 50381
Now, God alone is good by nature. For He, who has that which is without beginning, has it not by creation, but by nature. Man, however, who exists entirely by creation, having a beginning, along with that beginning obtained the form in which he exists; and thus he is not by nature disposed to good, but by creation, not having it as his own attribute to be good, because, (as we have said,) it is not by nature, but by creation, that he is disposed to good, according to the appointment of his good Creator, even the Author of all good. In order, therefore, that man might have a goodness of his own, bestowed on him by God, and there might be henceforth in man a property, and in a certain sense a natural attribute of goodness, there was assigned to him in the constitution of his nature, as a formal witness of the goodness which God bestowed upon him, freedom and power of the will, such as should cause good to be performed spontaneously by man, as a property of his own, on the ground that no less than this would be required in the matter of a goodness which was to be voluntarily exercised by him, that is to say, by the liberty of his will, without either favour or servility to the constitution of his nature,
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.2, ch.6

{Free will; Gen 1:27}
Location 50392
because, if he were wanting in this prerogative of self-mastery, so as to perform even good by necessity and not will, he would, in the helplessness of his servitude, become subject to the usurpation of evil, a slave as much to evil as to good.
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.2, ch.6

{Free will}
Location 50396
But the reward neither of good nor of evil could be paid to the man who should be found to have been either good or evil through necessity and not choice. In this really lay the Law which did not exclude, but rather prove, human liberty by a spontaneous rendering of obedience, or a spontaneous commission of iniquity; so patent was the liberty of man's will for either issue.
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.2, ch.6

{Free will}
Location 50413
you will not wonder at the fact that God did not interfere to prevent the occurrence of what He wished not to happen, in order that He might keep from harm what He wished. For, since He had once for all allowed (and, as we have shown, worthily allowed) to man freedom of will and mastery of himself, surely He from His very authority in creation permitted these gifts to be enjoyed: to be enjoyed, too, so far as lay in Himself, according to His own character as God, that is, for good (for who would permit anything hostile to himself?);
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.2, ch.7

{Free will; Foreknowledge of God; 1 Pet 1:2}
Location 50418
The necessary consequence, therefore, was, that God must separate from the liberty which He had once for all bestowed upon man (in other words, keep within Himself), both His foreknowledge and power, through which He might have prevented man's falling into danger when attempting wrongly to enjoy his liberty. Now, if He had interposed, He would have rescinded the liberty of man's will, which He had permitted with set purpose, and in goodness.
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.2, ch.7

{Foreknowledge of God; 1 Pet 1:2}
Location 50426
God, however, did foreknow that man would make a bad use of his created constitution; and yet what can be so worthy of God as His earnestness of purpose, and the truth of His created works, be they what they may?
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.2, ch.7

{Gen 3:1; Gen 2:16-17; Gen 1:27}
Location 50438
No doubt it was an angel who was the seducer; but then the victim of that seduction was free, and master of himself; and as being the image and likeness of God, was stronger than any angel;
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.2, ch.8

{Jn 3:8}
*; so the Vulgate has spiraculum, not spiritum. [Kaye (p. 247) again refers to Profr. Andrews Norton of Harvard for valuable remarks concerning the use of the word spiritus by the ancients. Evidences, Vol. III. p. 160, note 7.]
Location 50451
We must at the outset hold fast the meaning of the Greek scripture, which has afflatus, not spirit*. Some interpreters of the Greek, without reflecting on the difference of the words, and careless about their exact meaning, put spirit for afflatus; they thus afford to heretics an opportunity of tarnishing the Spirit of God, that is to say, God Himself, with default. And now comes the question. Afflatus, observe then, is less than spirit, although it comes from spirit; it is the spirit's gentle breeze, but it is not the spirit.
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.2, ch.9

{Jn 3:5-8; Gen 1:27; Jn 4:24}
Location 50455
One may call a breeze the image of the spirit. In the same manner, man is the image of God, that is, of spirit; for God is spirit. Afflatus is therefore the image of the spirit.
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.2, ch.9

{Jn 3:8}
Location 50459
therefore the afflatus also, that is to say, the image, ought not by any possibility to have done wrong. In this respect will the image be less than the reality, and the afflatus inferior to the spirit, in that, while it possesses beyond doubt the true lineaments of divinity, such as an immortal soul, freedom and its own mastery over itself, foreknowledge in a great degree, reasonableness, capacity of understanding and knowledge, it is even in these respects an image still, and never amounts to the actual power of Deity, nor to absolute exemption from fault,- a
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.2, ch.9

{1 Thess 5:23; Gen 2:7}
Location 50464
In like manner, the soul, the image of the spirit, is unable to express the simple power thereof, that is to say, its happy exemption from sinning. Were it otherwise, it would not be soul, but spirit; not man, who received a soul, but God.
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.2, ch.9

{Gen 2:7; 1 Cor 15:45}
Location 50469
In fact, the Scripture, by expressly saying that God breathed into man's nostrils the breath of life, and that man became thereby a living soul, not a life-giving spirit, has distinguished that soul from the condition of the Creator.
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.2, ch.9

{Heb 2:14}
Location 50485
If death is the evil, death will not give the reproach of being its own author to Him who threatened it, but to him who despised it.
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.2, ch.9

{Ezek 28:11-16 [LXX]}
Location 50494
Now, whence originated this malice of lying and deceit towards man, and slandering of God? Most certainly not from God, who made the angel good after the fashion of His good works. Indeed, before he became the devil, he stands forth the wisest of creatures; and wisdom is no evil. If you turn to the prophecy of Ezekiel, you will at once perceive that this angel was both by creation good and by choice corrupt. For in the person of the prince of Tyre it is said in reference to the devil: "Moreover, the word of the Lord came unto me, saying, Son of man, take up a lamentation upon the king of Tyrus, and say unto him, Thus saith the Lord God: Thou sealest up the sum, full of wisdom, perfect in beauty" (this belongs to him as the highest of the angels, the archangel, the wisest of all); "amidst the delights of the paradise of thy God wast thou born" (for it was there, where God had made the angels in a shape which resembled the figure of animals).
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.2, ch.10

{Ezek 28:11-16 [LXX]}
Location 50505
This description, it is manifest, properly belongs to the transgression of the angel, and not to the prince's: for none among human beings was either born in the paradise of God, not even Adam himself, who was rather translated thither; nor placed with a cherub upon God's holy mountain, that is to say, in the heights of heaven, from which the Lord testifies that Satan fell; nor detained amongst the stones of fire, and the flashing rays of burning constellations, whence Satan was cast down like lightning. No, it is none else than the very author of sin who was denoted in the person of a sinful man: he was once irreproachable, at the time of his creation, formed for good by God, as by the good Creator of irreproachable creatures, and adorned with every angelic glory,
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.2, ch.10

{Ezek 28:16}
Location 50511
From the day when thine iniquities, says he, were discovered,- attributing to him those injuries wherewith he injured man when he was expelled from his allegiance to God,- even from that time did he sin, when he propagated his sin, and thereby plied "the abundance of his merchandise," that is, of his Wickedness, even the tale of his transgressions, because he was himself as a spirit no less (than man) created, with the faculty of free-will. For God would in nothing fail to endow a being who was to be next to Himself with a liberty
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.2, ch.10

{Free will; Gen 3:15}
Location 50516
and at the same time, by conceding a permission for the operation of his designs, He acted consistently with the purpose of His own goodness, deferring the devil's destruction for the self-same reason as He postponed the restitution of man. For He afforded room for a conflict, wherein man might crush his enemy with the same freedom of his will as had made him succumb
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.2, ch.10

{Rev 2:7}
Location 50520
and wherein God might be discovered to be so much the more good, as waiting for man to return from his present life to a more glorious paradise, with a right to pluck of the tree of life.
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.2, ch.10

{Gen 3:16; Gen 1:28; Gen 2:18}
Location 50525
Woman is at once condemned to bring forth in sorrow, and to serve her husband, although before she had heard without pain the increase of her race proclaimed with the blessing, Increase and multiply, and although she had been destined to be a help and not a slave to her male partner.
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.2, ch.11

{Gen 3:19; Gen 2:7; Gen 3:21; Gen 2:25}
Location 50528
Immediately arise sweat and labour for bread, where previously on every tree was yielded spontaneous food and untilled nourishment. Thenceforth it is "man to the ground," and not as before, "from the ground"; to death thenceforth, but before, to life; thenceforth with coats of skins, but before, nakedness without a blush. Thus God's prior goodness was from nature, His subsequent severity from a cause.
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.2, ch.11

{Prov 8:13}
Location 50539
there is nothing hostile to evil which is not good
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.2, ch.11

{Heb 1:9; Ps 45:7}
Location 50541
For nothing is good which is unjust; while everything, on the other hand, which is just is good.
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.2, ch.11

{Mt 19:17; Ps 145:17; Deut 32:4; Ps 119:137; Ps 119:142}
Location 50546
Where the just is, there also exists the good. In short, from the very first the Creator was both good and also just.
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.2, ch.12

{Mt 7:13; Ps 34:14; Prov 4:27; Prov 16:17}
Location 50567
unless some power of fear supervened, such as might compel the very unwilling to seek after good, and take care of it. But who, when so many incentives to evil were assailing him, would desire that good, which he could despise with impunity? Who, again, would take care of what he could lose without danger? You read how broad is the road to evil, how thronged in comparison with the opposite: would not all glide down that road were there nothing in it to fear? We dread the Creator's tremendous threats, and yet scarcely turn away from evil. What, if He threatened not? Will you call this justice an evil, when it is all unfavourable to evil? Will you deny it to be a good, when it has its eye towards good?
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.2, ch.13

{Hos 6:6; Ezek 33:11; Rom 11:22}
Location 50579
manifesting God as both a perfect father and a perfect master: a father in His mercy, a master in His discipline; a father in the mildness of His power, a master in its severity; a father who must be loved with dutiful affection, a master who must needs be feared; be loved, because He prefers mercy to sacrifice; be feared because He dislikes sin; be loved, because He prefers the sinner's repentance to his death; be feared, because He dislikes the sinners who do not repent.
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.2, ch.13

{Rom 9:17-18; Ex 9:16}
Location 50601
God hardens the heart of Pharaoh. He deserved, however, to be influenced to his destruction, who had already denied God, already in his pride so often rejected His ambassadors, accumulated heavy burdens on His people, and (to sum up all) as an Egyptian, had long been guilty before God of Gentile idolatry,
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.2, ch.14

{Ex 20:5; Ex 34:7; Mt 19:8}
Location 50610
Well, then, even though He required the sins of the fathers at the hands of the children, the hardness of the people made such remedial measures necessary for them, in order that, having their posterity in view, they might obey the divine law. For who is there that feels not a greater care for his children than for himself?
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.2, ch.15

{Lk 5:31-32; Heb 12:7-11}
Location 50626
What would be said, if, when you thought the doctor necessary, you were to find fault with his instruments, because they cut, or cauterize, or amputate, or tighten; whereas there could be no doctor of any value without his professional tools?
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.2, ch.16

{Phil 2:6-8; Acts 17:18; Col 2:8}
Location 50630
We are taught God by the prophets, and by Christ, not by the philosophers nor by Epicurus. We who believe that God really lived on earth, and took upon Him the low estate of human form, for the purpose of man's salvation, are very far from thinking as those do who refuse to believe that God cares for anything.
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.2, ch.16

{Apostle's Creed; 1 Cor 15:3-4}
Location 50634
Fortunately, however, it is a part of the creed of Christians even to believe that God did die, and yet that He is alive for evermore.
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.2, ch.16

{Rom 1:21-23}
Location 50635
Superlative is their folly, who prejudge divine things from human; so that, because in man's corrupt condition there are found passions of this description, therefore there must be deemed to exist in God also sensations of the same kind.
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.2, ch.16

{Rom 1:21-23; Gen 1:27; Gen 2:7; Isa 43:11-13}
Location 50643
because, when you confess Him to be God, you have, in fact, already determined that He is undoubtedly diverse from every sort of human conditions. Furthermore, although you allow, with others, that man was inbreathed by God into a living soul, not God by man, it is yet palpably absurd of you to be placing human characteristics in God rather than divine ones in man, and clothing God in the likeness of man, instead of man in the image of God.
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.2, ch.16

{Gen 1:27}
Location 50655
All these affections He is moved by in that peculiar manner of His own, in which it is profoundly fit that He should be affected; and it is owing to Him that man is also similarly affected in a way which is equally his own.
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.2, ch.16

{Mt 5:45}
Location 50659
the entire order of God as Judge is an operative one, and (that I may express myself in worthier words) protective of His Catholic and supreme goodness, which, removed as it is from judiciary emotions, and pure in its own condition,
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.2, ch.17

{Hos 6:6; Jon 3:10; 2 Kings 20:1; Dan 4:33; 1 Sam 14:45; 2 Sam 12:13}
Location 50668
which also restored the house of Israel as often as it condemned it, and addressed to it consolation no less frequently than reproof.
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.2, ch.17

{Jas 2:13; Ps 86:5; Lam 3:22-23}
Location 50669
Noting Him, as you do, when He takes vengeance, consider Him likewise when He shows mercy. In the scale, against His severity place His gentleness.
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.2, ch.17

{Lev 25:1-55; 1 Cor 9:9; 1 Tim 5:18}
Location 50676
To these prime counsels of innocence, chastity, and justice, and piety, are also added prescriptions of humanity, as when every seventh year slaves are released for liberty; when at the same period the land is spared from tillage; a place is also granted to the needy; and from the treading ox's mouth the muzzle is removed, for the enjoyment of the fruit of his labour before him, in order that kindness first shown in the case of animals might be raised from such rudiments to the refreshment of men.
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.2, ch.17

{Ex 21:24; Lev 24:20; Deut 19:21; Mt 5:38-42}
Location 50682
the statute of retaliation, requiring eye for eye, tooth for tooth, and stripe for stripe. Now there is not here any smack of a permission to mutual injury; but rather, on the whole, a provision for restraining violence. To a people which was very obdurate, and wanting in faith towards God,
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.2, ch.18

{Ex 32:33-34; Lev 26:23-25}
Location 50686
the commission of wrong was to be checked by the fear of a retribution immediately to happen; and so the permission of this retribution was to be the prohibition of provocation, that a stop might thus be put to all hot-blooded injury, whilst by the permission of the second the first is prevented by fear, and by this deterring of the first the second fails to be committed.
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.2, ch.18

{Lev 11:1-23; Num 11:5; Lk 12:15}
Location 50690
When, again, the Law took somewhat away from men's food, by pronouncing unclean certain animals which were once blessed, you should understand this to be a measure for encouraging continence, and recognise in it a bridle imposed on that appetite which, while eating angels' food, craved after the cucumbers and melons of the Egyptians. Recognise also therein a precaution against those companions of the appetite, even lust and luxury, which are usually chilled by the chastening of the appetite.
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.2, ch.18

{Mt 6:16-18; Prov 30:8-9}
Location 50695
Lastly, in order that man might be more readily educated by God for fasting, he was accustomed to such articles of food as were neither plentiful nor sumptuous, and not likely to pamper the appetite of the luxurious.
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.2, ch.18

{Ps 1:2}
Location 50708
"In that law would he meditate day and night." It was not in severity that its Author promulgated this law, but in the interest of the highest benevolence, which rather aimed at subduing the nation's hardness of heart,
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.2, ch.19

{Gal 3:24}
Location 50710
for I purposely abstain from touching on the mysterious senses of the Law, considered in its spiritual and prophetic relation, and as abounding in types of almost every variety and sort. It is enough at present, that it simply bound a man to God, so that no one ought to find fault with it,
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.2, ch.19

{Isa 1:16-18; Isa 58:6-7; Ps 34:13-14; Ps 4:4; Ps 1:1}
Location 50712
To help forward this beneficent, not onerous, purpose of the Law, the prophets were also ordained by the self-same goodness of God, teaching precepts worthy of God, how that men should "cease to do evil, learn to do well, seek judgment, judge the fatherless, and plead for the widow:" be fond of the divine expostulations: avoid contact with the wicked: "let the oppressed go free:" dismiss the unjust sentence, "deal their bread to the hungry; bring the outcast into their house; cover the naked, when they see him; nor hide themselves from their own flesh and kin:" "keep their tongue from evil, and their lips from speaking guile: depart from evil, and do good; seek peace, and pursue it:" be angry, and sin not; that is, not persevere in anger, or be enraged: "walk not in the counsel of the ungodly; nor stand in the way of sinners; nor sit in the seat of the scornful."
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.2, ch.19

{Ex 3:22; Ex 12:35-36; Gen 15:14}
Location 50736
first look at the case of the two nations, and then you will form a judgment of the Author of the command. The Egyptians put in a claim on the Hebrews for these gold and silver vessels. The Hebrews assert a counter claim, alleging that by the bond of their respective fathers, attested by the written engagement of both parties, there were due to them the arrears of that laborious slavery of theirs, for the bricks they had so painfully made, and the cities and palaces which they had built.
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.2, ch.20


{Ex 3:22; Ex 12:35-36; Gen 15:14}
Location 50741
the Egyptians demanding their vessels, and the Hebrews claiming the requital of their labours. But for all they say, the Egyptians justly renounced their restitution-claim then and there; while the Hebrews to this day, in spite of the Marcionites, re-assert their demand for even greater damages, insisting that, however large was their loan of the gold and silver, it would not be compensation enough, even if the labour of six hundred thousand men should be valued at only "a farthing" a day a piece.
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.2, ch.20

{Ex 3:22; Ex 12:35-36; Gen 15:14}
Location 50750
when He both made the Egyptians unconsciously grateful, and also gave His own people their discharge in full at the time of their migration by the scanty comfort of a tacit requital of their long servitude. It was plainly less than their due which He commanded to be exacted. The Egyptians ought to have given back their men-children also to the Hebrews.
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.2, ch.20

{Ex 20:9-10; Josh 6:4; Josh 6:15; Sabbath}
Location 50755
you reproach Him with fickleness and instability for contradictions in His commandments, such as that He forbade work to be done on Sabbath-days, and yet at the siege of Jericho ordered the ark to be carried round the walls during eight days; in other words, of course, actually on a Sabbath. You do not, however, consider the Law of the Sabbath: they are human works, not divine, which it prohibits.
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.2, ch.21

{Ex 20:4-5}{Ex 25:18; Isa 6:2}{Ex 20:4-5}


Location 50769
Likewise, when forbidding the similitude to be made of all things which are in heaven, and in earth, and in the waters, He declared also the reasons, as being prohibitory of all material exhibition of a latent idolatry. For He adds: "Thou shalt not bow down to them, nor serve them." ... Thus, too, the golden Cherubim and Seraphim were purely an ornament in the figured fashion of the ark; adapted to ornamentation for reasons totally remote from all condition of idolatry, on account of which the making a likeness is prohibited; ... and they are evidently not at variance with this law of prohibition, because they are not found in that form of similitude, in reference to which the prohibition is given.
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.2, ch.22

{Gen 4:4; Gen 8:20-21}
Location 50778
Although He had respect to the offerings of Abel, and smelled a sweet savour from the holocaust of Noah, yet what pleasure could He receive from the flesh of sheep, or the odour of burning victims? And yet the simple and God-fearing mind of those who offered what they were receiving from God, both in the way of food and of a sweet smell, was favourably accepted before God, in the sense of respectful homage to God, who did not so much want what was offered, as that which prompted the offering.
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.2, ch.22

{1 Sam 10:1; 1 Sam 13:10-14; 1 Kings 11:1-4; Foreknowledge of God}
Location 50793
nothing is so consistent for even a good judge as both to reject and to choose on the merits of the present moment. Saul is chosen, but he is not yet the despiser of the prophet Samuel. Solomon is rejected; but he is now become a prey to foreign women, and a slave to the idols of Moab and Sidon. What must the Creator do, in order to escape the censure of the Marcionites? Must He prematurely condemn men, who are thus far correct in their conduct, because of future delinquencies?
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.2, ch.23

{1 Tim 1:13-16; Ps 51:1-17; Foreknowledge of God}
Location 50799
Now, who is so faultless among men, that God could always have him in His choice, and never be able to reject him? Or who, on the other hand, is so void of any good work, that God could reject him forever, and never be able to choose him? Show me, then, the man who is always good, and he will not be rejected; show me, too, him who is always evil, and he will never be chosen.
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.2, ch.23

{1 Sam 15:11}
Location 50806
you interpret it with similar perverseness just as if it were with fickleness and improvidence that He repented, or on the recollection of some wrong-doing; because He actually said, "It repenteth me that I have set up Saul to be king," very much as if He meant that His repentance savoured of an acknowledgment of some evil work or error. Well, this is not always implied. For there occurs even in good works a confession of repentance, as a reproach and condemnation of the man who has proved himself unthankful for a benefit.
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.2, ch.24

{Foreknowledge of God; 1 Pet 1:2; Rom 8:29}
Location 50812
Neither was He ignorant how he would afterwards turn out. For no one would bear you out in imputing lack of foresight to that God whom, since you do not deny Him to be divine, you allow to be also foreseeing; for this proper attribute of divinity exists in Him.
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.2, ch.24

{1 Sam 15:11; Foreknowledge of God; 1 Pet 1:2; Rom 8:29}
Location 50815
choice of Saul, it follows that this repentance is to be understood as upbraiding another rather than as self-incriminating.
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.2, ch.24

{Jon 3:10}
Location 50816
Ninevites, when the book of Jonah declares, "And God repented of the evil that He had said that He would do unto them; and He did it not."
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.2, ch.24

{Isa 45:7; Jer 18:11}
Location 50824
We say, in short, that evil in the present case means, not what may be attributed to the Creator's nature as an evil being, but what may be attributed to His power as a judge. In accordance with which He declared, "I create evil," and, "I frame evil against you;" meaning not to sinful evils, but avenging ones.
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.2, ch.24

{Jon 3:10}
Location 50829
The Greeks also sometimes use the word "evils" for troubles and injuries (not malignant ones), as in this passage of yours is also meant. Therefore, if the Creator repented of such evil as this, as showing that the creature deserves uncondemnation,
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.2, ch.24

{Jon 3:10}
Location 50833
Yet He gave it the name of "evil," because of the evil and desert involved in the very suffering itself.
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.2, ch.24

{1 Sam 15:29}
Location 50841
"for He will not turn Himself, nor repent; for He does not repent as a man does." According, therefore, to this definition, the divine repentance takes in all cases a different form from that of man, in that it is never regarded as the result of improvidence or of fickleness, or of any condemnation of a good or an evil work.
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.2, ch.24

{Foreknowledge of God; 1 Sam 15:29}
Location 50843
mode of God's repentance? It is already quite clear, if you avoid referring it to human conditions. For it will have no other meaning than a simple change of a prior purpose; and this is admissible without any blame even in a man, much more in God, whose every purpose is faultless. Now in Greek the word for repentance (metanoia) is formed, not from the confession of a sin, but from a change of mind, which in God we have shown to be regulated by the occurrence of varying circumstances.
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.2, ch.24

{Gen 3:9; Gen 3:11}
Location 50850
God calls out to Adam, Where art thou? as if ignorant where he was; and when he alleged that the shame of his nakedness was the cause (of his hiding himself), He inquired whether he had eaten of the tree, as if He were in doubt. By no means; God was neither uncertain about the commission of the sin, nor ignorant of Adam's whereabouts.
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.2, ch.25

{Gen 3:9; Free will}
Location 50854
For the question ought not to be read in a merely interrogative tone, Where art thou, Adam? but with an impressive and earnest voice, and with an air of imputation, Oh, Adam, where art thou?- as much as to intimate: thou art no longer here, thou art in perdition- so that the voice is the utterance of One who is at once rebuking and sorrowing. ...
God put the question with an appearance of uncertainty, in order that even here He might prove man to be the subject of a free will in the alternative of either a denial or a confession, and give to him the opportunity of freely acknowledging his transgression, and, so far, of lightening it.
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.2, ch.25

{Gen 4:9; Mt 12:37}
Location 50863
In like manner He inquires of Cain where his brother was, just as if He had not yet heard the blood of Abel crying from the ground, in order that he too might have the opportunity from the same power of the will of spontaneously denying, and to this degree aggravating, his crime; and that thus there might be supplied to us examples of confessing sins rather than of denying them: so that even then was initiated the evangelic doctrine, "By thy words thou shalt be justified, and by thy words thou shalt be condemned."
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.2, ch.25

{Gen 4:10-15}
Location 50870
He did not actually curse Adam and Eve, for they were candidates for restoration, and they had been relieved by confession. Cain, however, He not only cursed; but when he wished to atone for his sin by death, He even prohibited his dying, so that he had to bear the load of this prohibition in addition to his crime.
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.2, ch.25

{Gen 18:21; Gen 11:5}
Location 50873
Coming down to the case of Sodom and Gomorrha, he says: "I will go down now, and see whether they have done altogether according to the cry of it which is come unto me; and if not, I will know." ... If you make merry at God's "going down," as if He could not except by the descent have accomplished His judgment, take care that you do not strike your own God with as hard a blow. For He also came down to accomplish what He wished.
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.2, ch.25

{Jn 9:3; Heb 2:14-15; Phil 2:6-8}
Location 50887
nothing is unworthy of God which causes men to believe in God.
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.2, ch.26

{Ex 32:10}
Location 50888
He makes this request of His servant Moses: "Let me alone, that my wrath may wax hot against them, and that I may consume them; and I will make of thee a great nation." ... you maintain that Moses is better than his God. ... Pitiable are ye also, as well as the people, since you know not Christ, prefigured in the person of Moses as the deprecator of the Father, and the offerer of His own life for the salvation of the people. It is enough, however, that the nation was at the instant really given to Moses. That which he, as a servant, was able to ask of the Lord, the Lord required of Himself. ... and that you might by such an instance learn how much privilege is vouchsafed with God to a faithful man and a prophet.
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.2, ch.26

{Heb 2:14-15; Phil 2:6-8}
Location 50898
And now, that I may briefly pass in review the other points which you have thus far been engaged in collecting, as mean, weak, and unworthy, for demolishing the Creator, I will propound them in a simple and definite statement: that God would have been unable to hold any intercourse with men, if He had not taken on Himself the emotions and affections of man, by means of which He could temper the strength of His majesty, which would no doubt have been incapable of endurance to the moderate capacity of man, by such a humiliation as was indeed degrading to Himself, but necessary for man, and such as on this very account became worthy of God, because nothing is so worthy of God as the salvation of man.
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.2, ch.27

{Phil 2:6-8}
Location 50906
For if the God (in whom ye believe,) even from His higher condition, prostrated the supreme dignity of His majesty to such a lowliness as to undergo death, even the death of the cross, why can you not suppose that some humiliations are becoming to our God also, only more tolerable than Jewish contumelies, and crosses, and sepulchers?
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.2, ch.27

{Phil 2:6-8; Ps 8:5; Mt 11:27; Ex 33:20}
Location 50908
Are these the humiliations which henceforth are to raise a prejudice against Christ (the subject as He is of human passions ) being a partaker of that Godhead against which you make the participation in human qualities a reproach? Now we believe that Christ did ever act in the name of God the Father; that He actually from the beginning held intercourse with (men); actually communed with patriarchs and prophets; was the Son of the Creator; was His Word; whom God made His Son by emitting Him from His own self, and thenceforth set Him over every dispensation and (administration of) His will, making Him a little lower than the angels, as is written in David. In which lowering of His condition He received from the Father a dispensation in those very respects which you blame as human; from the very beginning learning, even then, (that state of a) man which He was destined in the end to become. It is He who descends, He who interrogates, He who demands, He who swears. With regard, however, to the Father, the very gospel which is common to us will testify that He was never visible, according to the word of Christ: "No man knoweth the Father, save the Son." For even in the Old Testament He had declared, "No man shall see me, and live." He means that the Father is invisible, in whose authority and in whose name was He God who appeared as the Son of God. But with us Christ is received in the person of Christ, because even in this manner is He our God. Whatever attributes therefore you require as worthy of God, must be found in the Father, who is invisible and unapproachable, and placid, and (so to speak) the God of the philosophers; whereas those qualities which you censure as unworthy must be supposed to be in the Son, who has been seen, and heard, and encountered, the Witness and Servant of the Father, uniting in Himself man and God, God in mighty deeds, in weak ones man, in order that He may give to man as much as He takes from God. What in your esteem is the entire disgrace of my God, is in fact the sacrament of man's salvation.
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.2, ch.27

{2 Cor 8:9; Phil 2:6-8}
Location 50922
God held converse with man, that man might learn to act as God. God dealt on equal terms with man, that man might be able to deal on equal terms with God. God was found little, that man might become very great. You who disdain such a God, I hardly know whether you ex fidebelieve that God was crucified. How great, then, is your perversity in respect of the two characters of the Creator!
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.2, ch.27

{Ex 34:14; Ex 20:5; Deut 6:15}
Location 50965
Well, even here, too, I will allow that in these causes my God has been a jealous God, who has in His own right taken especial care that all things done by Him
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.2, ch.29

{Deut 4:35; Deut 4:39; Deut 6:4; 1 Cor 8:6}
Location 50977
after the proof which we have gone through that there is but one only God. For no doubt it has been already ruled with sufficient clearness, that Christ must be regarded as pertaining to no other God than the Creator, when it has been determined that no other God but the Creator should be the object of our faith.
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.3; ch.1

{Jn 1:14; Heb 1:5; Jn 17:18; Relationship of the Father and Son}
Location 50990
First, because He was the Son of God His Father. For this was a point of order, that the Father should announce the Son before the Son should the Father, and that the Father should testify of the Son before the Son should testify of the Father. Secondly, because, in addition to the title of Son, He was the Sent. The authority, therefore, of the Sender must needs have first appeared in a testimony of the Sent; because none who comes in the authority of another does himself set it forth for himself on his own assertion, but rather looks out for protection from it, for first comes the support of him who gives him his authority.
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.3; ch.2

{Prophecy; Isa 50:6; Eternity of God; Heb 13:8}

Location 51062
Now there are two conditions of prophetic announcement which I adduce: ... 
One, that future events are sometimes announced as if they were already passed. ... because there is no difference of time with that Being in whom eternity itself directs a uniform condition of seasons.
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.3; ch.5

{Isa 50:6; Unbelieving Jews}
Location 51067
Isaiah: "I gave my back to the smiters, and my cheeks (I exposed) to their hands. I hid not my face from shame and spitting." For whether it was Christ even then, as we hold, or the prophet, as the Jews say, who pronounced these words concerning himself,
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.3; ch.5

{Prophecy; Joel 3:18; Ex 3:8; Ex 3:17; Deut 26:9; Deut 26:15; Isa 41:18-19}
Location 51069
Another characteristic [of prophecy] will be, that very many events are figuratively predicted by means of enigmas and allegories and parables, and that they must be understood in a sense different from the literal description. For we both read of "the mountains dropping down new wine," but not as if one might expect "must" from the stones, or its decoction from the rocks; and also hear of "a land flowing with milk and honey," but not as if you were to suppose that you would ever gather Samian cakes from the ground; nor does God, forsooth, offer His services as a water-bailiff or a farmer when He says, "I will open rivers in a land; I will plant in the wilderness the cedar and the box-tree." In like manner, when, foretelling the conversion of the Gentiles, He says, "The beasts of the field shall honour me, the dragons and the owls," He surely never meant to derive His fortunate omens from the young of birds and foxes, and from the songsters of marvel and fable.
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.3; ch.5

{1 Cor 10:4}
Location 51077
also alleges that the rock which followed (the Israelites) and supplied them with drink was Christ;
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.3; ch.5

{Eph 5:25-32}
Location 51079
and to the Ephesians giving an intimation that, when it was declared in the beginning that a man should leave his father and mother and become one flesh with his wife, he applied this to Christ and the church.
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.3; ch.5

{Am 4:13}
Location 51102
Since, then, Christ was announced by the Creator, "who formeth the lightning, and createth the wind, and declareth unto man His Christ," as the prophet Joel says,
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.3; ch.6

{Lam 4:20; Relationship of the Father and Son}
Location 51110
We indeed, who know for certain that Christ always spoke in the prophets, as the Spirit of the Creator (for so says the prophet: "The person of our Spirit, Christ the Lord," who from the beginning was both heard and seen as the Father's vicegerent in the name of God), are
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.3; ch.6

{1 Jn 2:22-23; 1 Jn 4:1-3; Relationship of the Father and Son}
Location 51113
If, however, you would rather refer to God Himself, instead of to Christ, the whole imputation of Jewish ignorance from the first, through an unwillingness to allow that even anciently the Creator's Word and Spirit- that is to say, His Christ- was despised and not acknowledged by them, you will even in this subterfuge be defeated. For when you do not deny that the Creator's Son and Spirit and Substance is also His Christ, you must needs allow that those who have not acknowledged the Father have failed likewise to acknowledge the Son through the identity of their natural substance;
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.3; ch.6

{Isa 8:14; Zech 4:7; Dan 2:34}
Location 51137
He shall no longer remain "a stone of stumbling and a rock of offence," but after His rejection become "the chief corner-stone," accepted and elevated to the top place of the temple, even His church, being that very stone in Daniel, cut out of the mountain, which was to smite and crush the image of the secular kingdom.
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.3; ch.7

{Zech 3:1-5}
Location 51147
So also in Zechariah, Christ Jesus, the true High Priest of the Father, in the person of Joshua [Jesus], nay, in the very mystery of His name, is portrayed in a twofold dress with reference to both His advents. At first He is clad in sordid garments, that is to say, in the lowliness of suffering and mortal flesh: then the devil resisted Him, as the instigator of the traitor Judas, not to mention his tempting Him after His baptism: afterwards He was stripped of His first filthy raiment, and adorned with the priestly robe and mitre, and a pure diadem; in other words, with the glory and honour of His second advent.
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.3; ch.7

{Lev 16:5,7}
Location 51152
If I may offer, moreover, an interpretation of the two goats which were presented on "the great day of atonement," do they not also figure the two natures of Christ? They were of like size, and very similar in appearance, owing to the Lord's identity of aspect; because He is not to come in any other form, having to be recognised by those by whom He was also wounded and pierced. One of these goats was bound with scarlet, and driven by the people out of the camp into the wilderness, amid cursing, and spitting, and pulling, and piercing, being thus marked with all the signs of the Lord's own passion; while the other, by being offered up for sins, and given to the priests of the temple for meat, afforded proofs of His second appearance, when (after all sins have been expiated) the priests of the spiritual temple, that is, the church, are to enjoy the flesh, as it were, of the Lord's own grace,
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.3; ch.7

{1 Jn 4:1-3; 1 Jn 2:22-23; 2 Jn 7}
Location 51172
[According to Marcion, Christ] feigned himself to be what he was not- incarnate without being flesh, human without being man, and likewise a divine Christ without being God! But why should he not have propagated also the phantom of God?
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.3; ch.8

{Angel}
Location 51201
it will not be conceded to you, that in the angels there was only a putative flesh, but one of a true and solid human substance. For if (on your terms) it was no difficulty to him to manifest true sensations and actions in a putative flesh, it was much more easy for him still to have assigned the true substance of flesh to these true sensations and actions, as the proper Maker and Former thereof.
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.3; ch.9

{1 Cor 15:38-40; Heb 11:3; Gen 18:1-2; Gen 19:1}

Location 51206
was equally able to apply to angels too a flesh of any material whatsoever, who built even the world out of nothing, into so many and so various bodies, and that at a word! ... 
Therefore on that occasion He did Himself appear with the angels to Abraham in the verity of the flesh, which had not as yet undergone birth, because it was not yet going to die,
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.3, ch.9

{Heb 1:7; Ps 104:4}
Location 51220
Since the Creator "maketh His angels spirits, and His ministers a flame of fire"- as truly spirits as also fire- so has He truly made them flesh likewise;
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.3; ch.9

{Gen 6:1-4; Lk 20:36}
Location 51222
He has promised that He will one day form men into angels, who once formed angels into men.
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.3; ch.9

{Angels; Lk 1:28-29}
Location 51245
the Creator's angels when they conversed in flesh which was real, although unborn.
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.3; ch.11

{Isa 7:14; Mt 1:23}
Location 51275
For there is immediately added the interpretation of Emmanuel, "God with us;" so that you have to consider not merely the name as it is uttered, but also its meaning. The utterance is Hebrew, Emmanuel, of the prophet's own nation; but the meaning of the word, God with us, is by the interpretation made common property. Inquire, then, whether this name, God-with-us, which is Emmanuel, be not often used for the name of Christ, from the fact that Christ has enlightened the world.
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.3; ch.12

{Isa 7:14; Mt 1:23}
Location 51282
just indeed as every nation, by whatever word they would express God-with-us, has called Him Emmanuel, completing the sound in its sense. Now since Emmanuel is God-with-us, and God-with-us is Christ, who is in us (for "as many of you as are baptized into Christ, have put on Christ" ), Christ is as properly implied in the meaning of the name, which is God-with-us, as He is in the pronunciation of the name, which is Emmanuel.
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.3; ch.12

{Isa 8:4}
Location 51290
"For before the Child shall have knowledge to cry, My father and My mother, He shall take away the riches of Damascus and the spoil of Samaria before the king of Assyria." You should first examine the point of age, whether it can be taken to represent Christ as even yet a man, much less a warrior. Although, to be sure, He might be about to call to arms by His cry as an infant; might be about to sound the alarm of war not with a trumpet, but with a little rattle; might be about to seek His foe, not on horseback, or in chariot, or from parapet, but from nurse's neck or nursemaid's back, and so be destined to subjugate Damascus and Samaria from His mother's breasts! ... Now, since nature, certainly, nowhere grants to man to learn warfare before life, to pillage the wealth of a Damascus before he knows his father and mother's name, it follows that the passage in question must be deemed to be a figurative one.
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.3; ch.13

{Isa 7:14; Unbelieving Jews}
Location 51302
Then, again, Jewish cavillers, in order to disconcert us, boldly pretend that Scripture does not hold that a virgin, but only a young woman, is to conceive and bring forth. They are, however, refuted by this consideration, that nothing of the nature of a sign can possibly come out of what is a daily occurrence, the pregnancy and child-bearing of a young woman. A virgin mother is justly deemed to be proposed by God as a sign, but a warlike infant has no like claim to the distinction;
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.3; ch.13

{Mt 2:9-11; Isa 8:4}
Location 51308
But His destined capture of the riches of Damascus and the spoil of Samaria before the king of Assyria is no doubt a wonderful sign. Keep to the measure of His age, and seek the purport of the prophecy. ... The prophecy at once becomes intelligible and declares its own accomplishment. Let those eastern magi wait on the new-born Christ, presenting to Him, (although) in His infancy, their gifts of gold and frankincense; and surely an Infant will have received the riches of Damascus without a battle, and unarmed. For besides the generally known fact, that the riches of the East, that is to say, its strength and resources, usually consist of gold and spices, it is certainly true of the Creator, that He makes gold the riches of the other nations also.
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.3; ch.13

{Mt 2:9-11; Isa 8:4; 2 Kings 17:21-23}
Location 51316
For the East generally regarded the magi as kings; and Damascus was anciently deemed to belong to Arabia, before it was transferred to Syrophoenicia on the division of the Syrias (by Rome). Its riches Christ then received, when He received the tokens thereof in the gold and spices; while the spoils of Samaria were the magi themselves. These having discovered Him and honoured Him with their gifts, and on bended knee adored Him as their God and King, through the witness of the star which led their way and guided them, became the spoils of Samaria, that is to say, of idolatry, because, as it is easy enough to see, they believed in Christ. He designated idolatry under the name of Samaria, as that city was shameful for its idolatry, through which it had then revolted from God from the days of king Jeroboam.
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.3; ch.13

{Isa 1:10: Ezek 16:3; Isa 1:2}
Location 51323
Thus He calls the chief men of the Jews "rulers of Sodom," and the nation itself "people of Gomorrah." And in another passage He also says: "Thy father was an Amorite, and thy mother a Hittite," by reason of their kindred iniquity; although He had actually called them His sons: "I have nourished and brought up children." So likewise by Egypt is sometimes understood, in His sense, the whole world as being marked out by superstition and a curse. By a similar usage Babylon also in our (St.) John is a figure of the city of Rome, as being like (Babylon) great and proud in royal power, and warring down the saints of God. Now it was in accordance with this style that He called the magi by the name of Samaritans, because (as we have said) they had practised idolatry as did the Samaritans. Moreover, by the phrase "before or against the king of Assyria," understand "against Herod;" against whom the magi then opposed themselves, when they refrained from carrying him back word concerning Christ, whom he was seeking to destroy.
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.3; ch.13

{Ps 45:2-4; Rev 1:16; Eph 6:14-17; Mt 10:34}
Location 51333
"Gird on Thy sword," says David, "upon Thy thigh." But what do you read about Christ just before? "Thou art fairer than the children of men; grace is poured forth upon Thy lips." It amuses me to imagine that blandishments of fair beauty and graceful lips are ascribed to one who had to gird on His sword for war! So likewise, when it is added, "Ride on prosperously in Thy majesty," the reason is subjoined: "Because of truth, and meekness, and righteousness." But who shall produce these results with the sword, and not their opposites rather- deceit, and harshness, and injury- which, it must be confessed, are the proper business of battles? Let us see, therefore, whether that is not some other sword, which has so different an action. Now the Apostle John, in the Apocalypse, describes a sword which proceeded from the mouth of God as "a doubly sharp, two-edged one." This may be understood to be the Divine Word, who is doubly edged with the two testaments of the Law and the gospel- sharpened with wisdom, hostile to the devil, arming us against the spiritual enemies of all wickedness and concupiscence, and cutting us off from the dearest objects for the sake of God's holy name. If, however, you will not acknowledge John, you have our common master Paul, who "girds our loins about with truth, and puts on us the breastplate of righteousness, and shoes us with the preparation of the gospel of peace, not of war; who bids us take the shield of faith, wherewith we may be able to quench all the fiery darts of the devil, and the helmet of salvation, and the sword of the Spirit, which (he says) is the word of God." This sword the Lord Himself came to send on earth, and not peace. If he is your Christ, then even he is a warrior. If he is not a warrior, and the sword he brandishes is an allegorical one, then the Creator's Christ in the psalm too may have been girded with the figurative sword of the Word, without any martial gear.
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.3; ch.14

{Ps 45:5}
Location 51352
"The people shall fall under Thee," that is, in adoration. Thus is the Creator's Christ mighty in war, and a bearer of arms; thus also does He now take the spoils, not of Samaria alone, but of all nations. Acknowledge, then, that His spoils are figurative, since you have learned that His arms are allegorical. Since, therefore, both the Lord speaks and His apostle writes such things in a figurative style, we are not rash in using His interpretations, the records of which even our adversaries admit;
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.3; ch.14

{1 Cor 8:5; 2 Jn 7: 1 Jn 4:2-3; Relationship of the Father and Son}
Location 51362
For the name of God, as being the natural designation of Deity, may be ascribed to all those beings for whom a divine nature is claimed,- as, for instance, even to idols. The apostle says: "For there be that are called gods, whether in heaven or in earth." The name of Christ, however, does not arise from nature, but from dispensation; and so becomes the proper name of Him to whom it accrues in consequence of the dispensation. ... For Christ means anointed, and to be anointed is certainly an affair of the body. He who had not a body, could not by any possibility have been anointed;
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.3; ch.15

{Mal 4:5; Unbelieving Jews; Rom 11:25}
Location 51390
Jews, from whom wisdom was taken away. To this day, in short, it is Christ that they are looking for, not Jesus; and they interpret Elias to be Christ rather than Jesus.
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.3; ch.16

{Num 13:8; Num 13:16}
Location 51397
When Oshea the son of Nun was destined to be the successor of Moses, is not his old name then changed, and for the first time he is called Joshua? It is true, you say. This, then, we first observe, was a figure of Him who was to come.
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.3; ch.16

{Josh 1:3-9; Josh 5:2-3; 1 Cor 10:4}
Location 51398
inasmuch as Jesus Christ was to introduce a new generation (because we are born in the wilderness of this world) into the promised land which flows with milk and honey, that is, into the possession of eternal life, than which nothing can be sweeter; inasmuch, too, as this was to be brought about not by Moses, that is to say, not by the discipline of the Law, but by Joshua, by the grace of the gospel, our circumcision being effected by a knife of stone, that is, (by the circumcision) of Christ, for Christ is a rock (or stone),
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.3; ch.16

{Ex 23:20}
Location 51403
Joshua. This name Christ Himself even then testified to be His own, when He talked with Moses. For who was it that talked with him, but the Spirit of the Creator, which is Christ? When He therefore spake this commandment to the people, "Behold, I send my angel before thy face, to keep thee in the way, and to bring thee into the land which I have prepared for thee; attend to him, and obey his voice and do not provoke him; for he has not shunned you, since my name is upon him," He called him an angel indeed, because of the greatness of the powers which he was to exercise, and because of his prophetic office, while announcing the will of God; but Joshua also (Jesus), because it was a type of His own future name.
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.3; ch.16

{Isa 42:3; Mt 12:20-21}
Location 51432
who broke not the bruised reed- that is, the shattered faith of the Jews- nor quenched the smoking flax- that is, the freshly-kindled ardour of the Gentiles.
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.3; ch.17

{Isa 50:10; Isa 53:4}
Location 51437
how Christ was fore-announced by Isaiah as a preacher: "For who is there among you," says he, "that feareth the Lord, that obeyeth the voice of His Son?" And likewise as a healer: "For," says he, "He hath taken away our infirmities, and carried our sorrows."
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.3; ch.17

{Deut 33:17; Gen 37:28; Gen 49:22-24; }
Location 51450
Joseph likewise was a type of Christ, not indeed on this ground (that I may not delay my course), that he suffered persecution for the cause of God from his brethren, as Christ did from His brethren after the flesh, the Jews; but when he is blessed by his father in these words: "His glory is that of a bullock; his horns are the horns of a unicorn; with them shall he push the nations to the very ends of the earth,"- he was not, of course, designated as a mere unicorn with its one horn, or a minotaur with two; but Christ was indicated in him- a bullock in respect of both His characteristics: to some as severe as a Judge, to others gentle as a Saviour, whose horns were the extremities of His cross. For of the antenna, which is a part of a cross, the ends are called horns; while the midway stake of the whole frame is the unicorn. By this virtue, then, of His cross, and in this manner "horned," He is both now pushing all nations through faith, bearing them away from earth to heaven;
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.3; ch.18

{Gen 49:6}
Location 51458
He is spiritually interpreted to be Jacob against Simeon and Levi, which means against the scribes and the Pharisees; for it was from them that these last derived their origin. Like Simeon and Levi, they consummated their wickedness by their heresy, with which they persecuted Christ. "Into their counsel let not my soul enter; to their assembly let not my heart be united: for in their anger they slew men," that is, the prophets; "and in their self-will they hacked the sinews of a bullock," that is, of Christ. ... For against Him did they wreak their fury after they had slain His prophets, even by affixing Him with nails to the cross. Otherwise, it is an idle thing when, after slaying men, he inveighs against them for the torture of a bullock!
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.3; ch.18

{Jer 11:19}
Location 51479
This tree it is which Jeremiah likewise gives you intimation of, when he prophesies to the Jews, who should say, "Come, let us destroy the tree with the fruit, (the bread) thereof," that is, His body. For so did God in your own gospel even reveal the sense, when He called His body bread; so that, for the time to come, you may understand that He has given to His body the figure of bread, whose body the prophet of old figuratively turned into bread,
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.3; ch.19

{Ps 22:21}
Location 51485
And again, when He implores His Father's help, He says, "Save me from the lion's mouth," that is, the jaws of death, "and my humiliation from the horns of the unicorns;" in other words, from the extremities of the cross, as we have shown above. Now, David himself did not suffer this cross, nor did any other king of the Jews; so that you cannot suppose that this is the prophecy of any other's passion than His who alone
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.3; ch.19

{Isa 53:8}
Location 51497
in a single sentence of Isaiah, who says, "His sepulture was removed from the midst of them." Now there could have been no sepulture without death, and no removal of sepulture except by resurrection.
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.3; ch.19

{Isa 53:12}
Location 51498
Then, finally, he added: "Therefore He shall have many for his inheritance, and He shall divide the spoil of the many, because He poured out His soul unto death." For there is here set forth the cause of this favour to Him, even that it was to recompense Him for His suffering of death.
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.3; ch.19

{Ps 2:7-8}
Location 51510
the Father's promise in the Psalms: "Thou art my Son, this day have I begotten Thee. Ask of me, and I shall give Thee the heathen for Thine inheritance, and the uttermost parts of the earth for Thy possession." You will not be able to put in a claim for some son of David being here meant, rather than Christ; or for the ends of the earth being promised to David, whose kingdom was confined to the Jewish nation simply,
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.3; ch.20

{Ps 132:11}
Location 51521
Touching this promise of Him, there is the oath to David in the psalm, "Of the fruit of thy body will I set upon thy throne." What body is meant? David's own? Certainly not. For David was not to give birth to a son. Nor his wife's either. For instead of saying, "Of the fruit of thy body," he would then have rather said, "Of the fruit of thy wife's body." But by mentioning his body, it follows that He pointed to some one of his race of whose body the flesh of Christ was to be the fruit, which bloomed forth from Mary's womb. He named the fruit of the body (womb) alone, because it was peculiarly fruit of the womb, of the womb only in fact, and not of the husband also; and he refers the womb (body) to David, as to the chief of the race and father of the family. Because it could not consist with a virgin's condition to consort her with a husband, He therefore attributed the body (womb) to the father.
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.3; ch.20

{Jn 1:10; Col 1:16; Eph 1:10}
Location 51539
It is Christ whom all nations now invoke, which knew Him not; Christ to whom all races now betake themselves, whom they were ignorant of before.
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.3; ch.20

{Isa 52:7; Rom 10:15; Ps 19:5; Isa 46:12-13}
Location 51567
You have the work of the apostles also predicted: "How beautiful are the feet of them which preach the gospel of peace, which bring good tidings of good," not of war nor evil tidings. In response to which is the psalm, "Their sound is gone through all the earth, and their words to the ends of the world;" that is, the words of them who carry round about the Law that proceeded from Sion and the Lord's word from Jerusalem, in order that that might come to pass which was written: "They who were far from my righteousness, have come near to my righteousness and truth."
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.3; ch.22

{Ps 2:2-3; Acts 4:25-30}
Location 51577
By thus departing from Judaism itself, when they [the apostles] exchanged the obligations and burdens of the Law for the liberty of the gospel, they were fulfilling the psalm, "Let us burst their bonds asunder, and cast away their yoke from us;" and this indeed (they did) after that "the heathen raged, and the people imagined vain devices;" after that "the kings of the earth set themselves, and the rulers took their counsel together against the Lord, and against His Christ."
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.3; ch.22

{Isa 57:1; Wisd 2:12}
Location 51584
"See how the righteous perisheth, and no man layeth it to heart; and how merciful men are taken away, and no man considereth. For the righteous man has been removed from the evil person." Who is this but Christ? "Come, say they, let us take away the righteous, because He is not for our turn, (and He is clean contrary to our doings)."
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.3; ch.22

{Ezek 9:4; Ps 22:22; Ps 22:25; Ps 68:26; Mal 1:10-11}
Location 51587
and He signed them with that very seal of which Ezekiel spake: "The Lord said unto me, Go through the gate, through the midst of Jerusalem, and set the mark Tau upon the foreheads of the men." Now the Greek letter Tau and our own letter T is the very form of the cross, which He predicted would be the sign on our foreheads in the true universal Jerusalem, in which, according to the twenty-first Psalm, the brethren of Christ or children of God would ascribe glory to God the Father, in the person of Christ Himself addressing his Father, "I will declare your name unto my brethren; in the midst of the congregation will I sing praise unto you." For that which had to come to pass in our day in His name, and by His Spirit, He rightly foretold would be of Him. And a little afterwards He says: "My praise shall be of You in the great congregation." In the sixty-seventh Psalm He says again: "In the congregations bless ye the Lord God." So that with this agrees also the prophecy of Malachi: "I have no pleasure in you, says the Lord; neither will I accept your offerings."
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.3; ch.22

{Isa 2:20}
Location 51600
Now, since you join the Jews in denying that their Christ has come, recollect also what is that end which they were predicted as about to bring on themselves after the time of Christ, for the impiety wherewith they both rejected and slew Him. For it began to come to pass from that day, when, according to Isaiah, "a man threw away his idols of gold and of silver, which they made into useless and hurtful objects of worship;" in other words, from the time when he threw away his idols after the truth had been made clear by Christ.
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.3; ch.23

{Isa 3:1-3; Isa 5:6-7}
Location 51604
Consider whether what follows in the prophet has not received its fulfilment: "The Lord of hosts hath taken away from Judah and from Jerusalem, amongst other things, both the prophet and the wise artificer;" that is, His Holy Spirit, who builds the church, which is indeed the temple, and household and city of God. For thenceforth God's grace failed amongst them; and "the clouds were commanded to rain no rain upon the vineyard" of Sorech; to withhold, that is, the graces of heaven, that they shed no blessing upon "the house of Israel," which had but produced "the thorns" wherewith it had crowned the Lord,
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.3; ch.23

{Isa 1:7-8; Isa 1:3-4; Isa 1:20; Ps 59:11}
Location 51611
neither in the interval from Tiberius to Vespasian did they learn repentance. Therefore "has their land become desolate, their cities are burnt with fire, their country strangers are devouring before their own eyes; the daughter of Sion has been deserted like a cottage in a vineyard, or a lodge in a garden of cucumbers," ever since the time when "Israel acknowledged not the Lord, and the people understood Him not, but forsook Him, and provoked the Holy One of Israel unto anger." So likewise that conditional threat of the sword, "If ye refuse and hear me not, the sword shall devour you," has proved that it was Christ, for rebellion against whom they have perished. In the fifty-eighth Psalm He demands of the Father their dispersion: "Scatter them in Thy power."
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.3; ch.23

{Hades; Lk 16:22-23; Israel in Prophecy}
Location 51637
Besides, your Christ [i.e., of Marcion] promises to the Jews their primitive condition, with the recovery of their country; and after this life's course is over, repose in Hades in Abraham's bosom. Oh, most excellent God, when He restores in amnesty what He took away in wrath!
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.3; ch.24

{Lk 24:44; 2 Cor 1:20; Israel in Prophecy}
On the Hope of the Faithful. This work, which is not extant (although its title appears in one of the oldest MSS. of Tertullian, the Codex Agobardinus), is mentioned by St. Jerome in his Commentary on Ezekiel, chap. 36; in the preface to his Comment. on Isaiah, chap. 18; and in his notice of Papias of Hierapolis (Oehler). 
Location 51641
As for the restoration of Judaea, however, which even the Jews themselves, induced by the names of places and countries, hope for just as it is described, it would be tedious to state at length how the figurative interpretation is spiritually applicable to Christ and His church, and to the character and fruits thereof; besides, the subject has been regularly treated in another work, which we entitle De Spe Fidelium.
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.3; ch.24

{Rev 21:2; Gal 4:26; Phil 3:20; Ezek 48:30-35; Rev 21:10-23; Millennium}
Location 51644
But we do confess that a kingdom is promised to us upon the earth, although before heaven, only in another state of existence; inasmuch as it will be after the resurrection for a thousand years in the divinely-built city of Jerusalem, "let down from heaven," which the apostle also calls "our mother from above;" and, while declaring that our politeuma , or citizenship, is in heaven, he predicates of it that it is really a city in heaven. This both Ezekiel had knowledge of and the Apostle John beheld.
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.3; ch.24

{Rev 20:1-15; Rev 21:1-4; 1 Cor 15:51-54}
Location 51651
We say that this city has been provided by God for receiving the saints on their resurrection, and refreshing them with the abundance of all really spiritual blessings, as a recompense for those which in the world we have either despised or lost; since it is both just and God-worthy that His servants should have their joy in the place where they have also suffered affliction for His name's sake. Of the heavenly kingdom this is the process. After its thousand years are over, within which period is completed the resurrection of the saints, who rise sooner or later according to their deserts there will ensue the destruction of the world and the conflagration of all things at the judgment: we shall then be changed in a moment into the substance of angels, even by the investiture of an incorruptible nature, and so be removed to that kingdom in heaven of which we have now been treating,
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.3; ch.24

{Gen 27:28; Gen 13:16; Gen 15:5}
Location 51660
Abraham's seed, after the primal promise of being like the sand of the sea for multitude, is destined likewise to an equality with the stars of heaven- are not these the indications both of an earthly and a heavenly dispensation? When Isaac, in blessing his son Jacob, says, "God give thee of the dew of heaven, and the fatness of the earth," are there not in his words examples of both kinds of blessing?
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.3; ch.24

{Gen 27:39}
Location 51666
But to Esau the blessing promised is an earthly one, which he supplements with a heavenly, after the fatness of the earth, saying, "Thy dwelling shall be also of the dew of heaven." For the dispensation of the Jews (who were in Esau, the prior of the sons in birth, but the later in affection) at first was imbued with earthly blessings through the Law, and afterwards brought round to heavenly ones through the gospel by faith.
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.3; ch.24

{Antinomianism; Mat 5:17-19; Rom 6:1-2; Rom 3:31; Rom 7:7}
Location 51701
[re works of Marcion] composed of contrary statements set in opposition, thence entitled Antitheses, and compiled with a view to such a severance of the Law from the Gospel
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.4, ch.1

{Isa 2:4}
And as the result of this, "they beat their swords into ploughshares, and their spears (which are a kind of hunting instruments) into pruning-hooks;" that is to say, minds, which once were fierce and cruel, are changed by them into good dispositions productive of good fruit.
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.4, ch.1

{Isa 2:4 LXX; Isa 19:7; Isa 10:23}
Location 51719
And again: "Hearken unto me, hearken unto me, my people, and ye kings, give ear unto me; for a law shall proceed from me, and my judgment for a light to the nations;" wherefore He had determined and decreed that the nations also were to be enlightened by the Law and the word of the gospel. This will be that law which (according to David also) is unblameable, because "perfect, converting the soul" from idols unto God. This likewise will be the word concerning which the same Isaiah says, "For the Lord will make a decisive word in the land." Because the New Testament is compendiously short, and freed from the minute and perplexing burdens of the Law.
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.4, ch.1

{Isa 11:1; Mt 1:1-16; Lk 3:23}
Location 51728
That He was of the family of David, according to the genealogy of Mary, He declared in a figurative way even by the rod which was to proceed out of the stem of Jesse.
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.4, ch.1

{Mal 1:10-11}
Location 51732
and in every place a sacrifice is offered unto my name, even a pure offering"- meaning simple prayer from a pure conscience
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.4, ch.1

{New Testament Canon; Harmony of the Gospels}
Location 51752
We lay it down as our first position, that the evangelical Testament has apostles for its authors, to whom was assigned by the Lord Himself this office of publishing the gospel. Since, however, there are apostolic men also, they are yet not alone, but appear with apostles and after apostles; because the preaching of disciples might be open to the suspicion of an affectation of glory, if there did not accompany it the authority of the masters, which means that of Christ, for it was that which made the apostles their masters. Of the apostles, therefore, John and Matthew first instill faith into us; whilst of apostolic men, Luke and Mark renew it afterwards. These all start with the same principles of the faith, so far as relates to the one only God the Creator and His Christ, how that He was born of the virgin, and came to fulfil the Law and the Prophets. Never mind if there does occur some variation in the order of their narratives, provided that there be agreement in the essential matter of the faith,
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.4, ch.2

{New Testament Canon; Rev 22:18-19; Gal 2:2; Marcion; Apostles}
Location 51763
Now, of the authors whom we possess, Marcion seems to have singled out Luke for his mutilating process. Luke, however, was not an apostle, but only an apostolic man; not a master, but a disciple, and so inferior to a master- at least as far subsequent to him as the apostle whom he followed (and that, no doubt, was Paul ) was subsequent to the others; so that, had Marcion even published his Gospel in the name of St. Paul himself, the single authority of the document, destitute of all support from preceding authorities, would not be a sufficient basis for our faith. There would be still wanted that Gospel which St. Paul found in existence, to which he yielded his belief, and with which he so earnestly wished his own to agree, that he actually on that account went up to Jerusalem to know and consult the apostles, "lest he should run, or had been running in vain;" in other words, that the faith which he had learned, and the gospel which he was preaching, might be in accordance with theirs.
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.4, ch.2

{New Testament Canon; Apostles}
Location 51772
therefore, [Paul], as the enlightener of St. Luke himself desired the authority of his predecessors for both his own faith and preaching, how much more may not I require for Luke's Gospel that which was necessary for the Gospel of his master.
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.4, ch.2

{Gal 2:13-14; 1 Cor 9:22; Gal 2:9}
Location 51778
but Marcion, finding the Epistle of Paul to the Galatians (wherein he rebukes even apostles) for "not walking uprightly according to the truth of the gospel," as well as accuses certain false apostles of perverting the gospel of Christ), labours very hard to destroy the character of those Gospels which are published as genuine and under the name of apostles, in order, forsooth, to secure for his own Gospel the credit which he takes away from them. But then, even if he censures Peter and John and James, who were thought to be pillars, it is for a manifest reason. They seemed to be changing their company from respect of persons. And yet as Paul himself "became all things to all men," that he might gain all, it was possible that Peter also might have betaken himself to the same plan of practising somewhat different from what he taught. And, in like manner, if false apostles also crept in, their character too showed itself in their insisting upon circumcision and the Jewish ceremonies.
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.4, ch.3

{Apostolic Faith; Principle of Time}
Location 51799
I say that my Gospel is the true one; Marcion, that his is. I affirm that Marcion's Gospel is adulterated; Marcion, that mine is. Now what is to settle the point for us, except it be that principle of time, which rules that the authority lies with that which shall be found to be more ancient; and assumes as an elemental truth, that corruption (of doctrine) belongs to the side which shall be convicted of comparative lateness in its origin. For, inasmuch as error is falsification of truth, it must needs be that truth therefore precede error.
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.4, ch.4

{Apostolic Faith; Principle of Time; Marcion}
Location 51809
that portion of it which we alone receive is so much older than Marcion, that Marcion himself once believed it, when in the first warmth of faith he contributed money to the Catholic church, which along with himself was afterwards rejected, when he fell away from our truth into his own heresy.
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.4, ch.4

{New Testament Canon; 1 Pet 5:13; Introduction to Revelation; Marcion}
Location 51830
Let us see what milk the Corinthians drank from Paul; to what rule of faith the Galatians were brought for correction; what the Philippians, the Thessalonians, the Ephesians read by it; what utterance also the Romans give, so very near (to the apostles), to whom Peter and Paul conjointly bequeathed the gospel even sealed with their own blood. We have also St. John's foster churches. For although Marcion rejects his Apocalypse, the order of the bishops (thereof), when traced up to their origin, will yet rest on John as their author. In the same manner is recognised the excellent source of the other churches. I say, therefore, that in them (and not simply such of them as were founded by apostles, but in all those which are united with them in the fellowship of the mystery of the gospel of Christ) that Gospel of Luke which we are defending with all our might has stood its ground from its very first publication; whereas Marcion's Gospel is not known to most people, and to none whatever is it known without being at the same time condemned.
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.4, ch.5

{New Testament Canon; Introduction to Mark; Introduction to Luke}
Location 51840
I mean the Gospels of John and Matthew- whilst that which Mark published may be affirmed to be Peter's whose interpreter Mark was. For even Luke's form of the Gospel men usually ascribe to Paul. And it may well seem that the works which disciples publish belong to their masters.
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.4, ch.5

{Apostolic Faith; Apostolic Tradition; Principle of Time}
Location 51859
when we take up arms against heretics for the faith of the gospel, maintaining both that order of periods, which rules that a late date is the mark of forgers, and that authority of churches which lends support to the tradition of the apostles; because truth must needs precede the forgery, and proceed straight from those by whom it has been handed on.
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.4, ch.5

{Isa 9:1-2; Mt 4:14-16}
Location 51897
As Isaiah says: "Drink in this first, and be prompt, O region of Zebulon and land of Nephthalim, and ye others who (inhabit) the sea-coast, and that of Jordan, Galilee of the nations, ye people who sit in darkness, behold a great light; upon you, who inhabit (that) land, sitting in the shadow of death, the light hath arisen."
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.4, ch.7

{Mt 5:17; Marcion}
Location 51903
He came not to destroy the Law and the prophets, but rather to fulfil them; but Marcion has erased the passage as an interpolation.
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.4, ch.7

{Mt 15:24; Mt 15:26; Marcion}
Location 51905
Marcion must even expunge from the Gospel, "I am not sent but unto the lost sheep of the house of Israel;" and, "It is not meet to take the children's bread, and to cast it to dogs,"
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.4, ch.7

{Mt 15:24; Mt 15:26}
Location 51908
Behold, it is to Israelites first that He offers the "bread" of His doctrine; surely it is because they are "children" that He shows them this priority. Observe, He does not yet impart it to others; surely He passes them by as "dogs."
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.4, ch.7

{Lk 4:16-21}
Location 51914
And even if He had the general right of entering the synagogue (like other Jews), yet the function of giving instruction was allowed only to a man who was extremely well known, and examined and tried, and for some time invested with the privilege after experience duly attested elsewhere.
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.4, ch.7

{Lam 4:7; Lk 4:16-30}
Location 51954
The Christ of the Creator had to be called a Nazarene according to prophecy; whence the Jews also designate us, on that very account, Nazarenes after Him. For we are they of whom it is written, "Her Nazarites were whiter than snow;" even they who were once defiled with the stains of sin, and darkened with the clouds of ignorance. But to Christ the title Nazarene was destined to become a suitable one, from the hiding-place of His infancy, for which He went down and dwelt at Nazareth, to escape from Archelaus the son of Herod. This fact I have not refrained from mentioning on this account, because it behoved Marcion's Christ to have forborne all connection whatever with the domestic localities of the Creator's Christ, when he had so many towns in Judaea which had not been by the prophets thus assigned to the Creator's Christ.
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.4, ch.8

{Isa 53:4; Greek Words}
Location 51970
"Surely," says he, "He hath borne our griefs and carried our sorrows." Now the Greeks are accustomed to use for carry a word which also signifies to take away.
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.4, ch.8

{Lk 5:12-14}
Location 52011
acknowledged- touched the leper, by whom (even although as man He might have been defiled) He could not be defiled as God, being of course incorruptible. The prescription, therefore, could not be meant for Him, that He was bound to observe the Law and not touch the unclean person, seeing that contact with the unclean would not cause defilement to Him.
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.4, ch.9

{2 Kings 5:9-14; Lk 4:27}
Location 52021
The cleansing of the Syrian rather was significant throughout the nations of the world of their own cleansing in Christ their light, steeped as they were in the stains of the seven deadly sins: idolatry, blasphemy, murder, adultery, fornication, false-witness, and fraud.
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.4, ch.9

{Lk 5:16-26; Isa 35:2-4}
Location 52064
The sick of the palsy is healed, and that in public, in the sight of the people. For, says Isaiah, "they shall see the glory of the Lord, and the excellency of our God." What glory, and what excellency? "Be strong, ye weak hands, and ye feeble knees:" this refers to the palsy. "Be strong; fear not."
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.4, ch.10

{Isa 7:14; Mt 1:23}
Location 52090
Since He is (begotten) of God the Father, He is not, of course, (the son) of a human father. If He is not of a human father, it follows that He must be (the son) of a human mother. If of a human mother, it is evident that she must be a virgin.
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.4, ch.10

{Dan 7:13-14}
Location 52102
What now, if Christ be described in Daniel by this very title of "Son of man?" Is not this enough to prove that He is the Christ of prophecy?
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.4, ch.10

{Dan 3:25; Dan 7:13}
Location 52113
Jesus of the Creator. It was He who was seen by the king of Babylon in the furnace with His martyrs: "the fourth, who was like the Son of man." He also was revealed to Daniel himself expressly as "the Son of man, coming in the clouds of heaven" as a Judge, as also the Scripture shows.
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.4, ch.10

{Ps 19:5-6; Isa 61:10; Isa 49:18; Cant 4:8}
Location 52162
I hold also that it is my Christ who is meant by the bridegroom, of whom the Psalm says: "He is as a bridegroom coming out of his chamber; His going forth is from the end of the heaven, and His return is back to the end of it again." By the mouth of Isaiah He also says exultingly of the Father: "Let my soul rejoice in the Lord; for He hath clothed me with the garment of salvation and with the tunic of joy, as a bridegroom. He hath put a mitre round about my head, as a bride." To Himself likewise He appropriates the church, concerning which the same Spirit says to Him: "Thou shalt clothe Thee with them all, as with a bridal ornament." This spouse Christ invites home to Himself also by Solomon from the call of the Gentiles, because you read: "Come with me from Lebanon, my spouse." He elegantly makes mention of Lebanon (the mountain, of course) because it stands for the name of frankincense with the Greeks; for it was from idolatry that He betrothed Himself the church.
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.4, ch.11

{Jer 4:3; Isa 43:19; 2 Cor 5:17}
Location 52175
When by Jeremiah He gave this precept, "Break up for yourselves new pastures," does He not turn away from the old state of things? And when by Isaiah He proclaims how "old things were passed away; and, behold, all things, which I am making, are new," does He not advert to a new state of things? We have generally been of opinion that the destination of the former state of things was rather promised by the Creator, and exhibited in reality by Christ, only under the authority of one and the same God, to whom appertain both the old things and the new. For new wine is not put into old bottles, except by one who has the old bottles; nor does anybody put a new piece to an old garment, unless the old garment be forthcoming to him.
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.4, ch.11

{Gal 3:21-25; Gal 4:4-5}
Location 52185
still we make this concession, that there is a separation, by reformation, by amplification, by progress; just as the fruit is separated from the seed, although the fruit comes from the seed. So likewise the gospel is separated from the Law, whilst it advances from the Law- a different thing from it, but not an alien one; diverse, but not contrary.
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.4, ch.11

{Josh 6:4; Mt 12:12; Mt 12:5}
Location 52206
carrying around the walls of the ark of the covenant for eight days running, and therefore on a Sabbath-day,
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.4, ch.12

{Ex 20:16; Ex 20:10; Ex 12:16; Mt 12:12; Mt 12:5}
Location 52229
The Pharisees, however, were in utter error concerning the Law of the Sabbath, not observing that its terms were conditional, when it enjoined rest from labour, making certain distinctions of labour. For when it says of the Sabbath-day, "In it thou shalt not do any work of thine," by the word thine it restricts the prohibition to human work- which every one performs in his own employment or business- and not to divine work. Now the work of healing or preserving is not proper to man, but to God. So again, in the Law it says, "Thou shalt not do any manner of work in it," except what is to be done for any soul, that is to say, in the matter of delivering the soul; because what is God's work may be done by human agency for the salvation of the soul.
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.4, ch.12

{Isa 1:13-14; Isa 29:13; Isa 58:13; Isa 56:2}
Location 52242
although He has in a certain place expressed an aversion of Sabbaths, by calling them your Sabbaths, reckoning them as men's Sabbaths, not His own, because they were celebrated without the fear of God by a people full of iniquities, and loving God "with the lip, not the heart," He has yet put His own Sabbaths (those, that is, which were kept according to His prescription) in a different position; for by the same prophet, in a later passage, He declared them to be "true, and delightful, and inviolable."
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.4, ch.12

{2 Kings 4:23; Mt 5:17; Mt 12:12; Mt 12:5}
Location 52252
restoring to the Sabbath the works which were proper for it. Since, in like manner, the prophet Elisha on this day restored to life the dead son of the Shunammite woman, [The Scripture does not seem to say this] you see, O Pharisee, and you too, O Marcion, how that it was proper employment for the Creator's Sabbaths of old to do good, to save life, not to destroy it; how that Christ introduced nothing new, which was not after the example,
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.4, ch.12

{Isa 40:9; Lk 4:32; Isa 52:6}
Location 52260
Surely to Sion He brings good tidings, and to Jerusalem peace and all blessings; He goes up into a mountain, and there spends a night in prayer, and He is indeed heard by the Father. Accordingly turn over the prophets, and learn therefrom His entire course. "Into the high mountain," says Isaiah, "get Thee up, who bringest good tidings to Sion; lift up Thy voice with strength, who bringest good tidings to Jerusalem." "They were mightily astonished at His doctrine; for He was teaching as one who had power." And again: "Therefore, my people shall know my name in that day." What name does the prophet mean, but Christ's?
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.4, ch.13

{Isa 52:6-7; Nah 1:15}
Location 52264
"That I am He that doth speak- even I." For it was He who used to speak in the prophets- the Word, the Creator's Son. "I am present, while it is the hour, upon the mountains, as one that bringeth glad tidings of peace, as one that publisheth good tidings of good." So one of the Twelve, Nahum: "For behold upon the mountain the swift feet of Him that bringeth glad tidings of peace."
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.4, ch.13

{Lk 6:13-19; Num 33:9; Ex 28:13-21; Josh 4:8-9}
Location 52271
But why was it that He chose twelve apostles, and not some other number? In truth, I might from this very point conclude of my Christ, that He was foretold not only by the words of prophets, but by the indications of facts. For of this number I find figurative hints up and down the Creator's dispensation in the twelve springs of Elim; in the twelve gems of Aaron's priestly vestment; and in the twelve stones appointed by Joshua to be taken out of the Jordan, and set up for the ark of the covenant. [Me: and the 12 minor prophets]
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.4, ch.13

{Mt 16:18; Lk 6:14; Isa 8:14; Rom 9:33; 1 Pet 2:8}
Again, He changes the name of Simon to Peter... , But why Peter? If it was because of the vigour of his faith, there were many solid materials which might lend a name from their strength. Was it because Christ was both a rock and a stone? For we read of His being placed "for a stone of stumbling and for a rock of offence." I omit the rest of the passage. Therefore He would gladly impart to the dearest of His disciples a name which was suggested by one of His own especial designations in figure; because it was, I suppose, more peculiarly fit than a name which might have been derived from no figurative description of Himself.
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.4, ch.13

{Lk 6:17; Ps 87:4-5[LXX]}
Location 52286
There come to Him from Tyre, and from other districts even, a transmarine multitude. This fact the psalm had in view: "And behold tribes of foreign people, and Tyre, and the people of the Ethiopians; they were there. Sion is my mother, shall a man say; and in her was born a man" (forasmuch as the God-man was born), and He built her by the Father's will; that you may know how Gentiles then flocked to Him, because He was born the God-man who was to build the church according to the Father's will- even of other races also.
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.4, ch.13

{Isa 49:12; Isa 49:18; Isa 49:21; Lk 6:17}
Location 52290
So says Isaiah too: "Behold, these come from far; and these from the north and from the west; and these from the land of the Persians." Concerning whom He says again: "Lift up thine eyes round about, and behold, all these have gathered themselves together." And yet again: "Thou seest these unknown and strange ones; and thou wilt say in thine heart, Who hath begotten me these? But who hath brought me up these? And these, where have they been?"
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.4, ch.13

{Lk 6:20}
Location 52298
"Blessed are the needy" (for no less than this is required for interpreting the word in the Greek), "because theirs is the kingdom of heaven."
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.4, ch.14

{Mt 9:35; Mt 11:5; Lk 4:18-21; Ps 68:5; Mal 3:5; Ps 82:3-4; Ps 72:4}
Location 52301
What is there, then, to wonder at, if He entered on His ministry with the very attributes of the Creator--who in language of the same sort--loved, consoled, protected, and avenged the beggar, and the poor, and the humble, and the widow, and the orphan? ... In the psalm he exclaims: "Defend the fatherless and the needy; do justice to the humble and the poor; deliver the poor, and rid the needy out of the hand of the wicked." Similarly in the seventy-first Psalm: "In righteousness shall He judge the needy amongst the people, and shall save the children of the poor."
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.4, ch.14

{Ps 72:11; Ps 72:12-14; Ps 9:17-18; Ps 113:5-8; 1 Sam 2:8}
Location 52308
And in the following words he says of Christ: "All nations shall serve Him." Now David only reigned over the Jewish nation, so that nobody can suppose that this was spoken of David; whereas He had taken upon Himself the condition of the poor, and such as were oppressed with want, "Because He should deliver the needy out of the hand of the mighty man; He shall spare the needy and the poor, and shall deliver the souls of the poor. From usury and injustice shall He redeem their souls, and in His sight shall their name be honoured." Again: "The wicked shall be turned into hell, even all the nations that forget God; because the needy shall not alway be forgotten; the endurance of the poor shall not perish for ever." Again: "Who is like unto the Lord our God, who dwelleth on high, and yet looketh on the humble things that are in heaven and on earth!- who raiseth up the needy from off the ground, and out of the dunghill exalteth the poor; that He may set him with the princes of His people," that is, in His own kingdom. ... And likewise earlier, in the book of Kings, Hannah the mother of Samuel gives glory to God in these words: "He raiseth the poor man from the ground, and the beggar, that He may set him amongst the princes of His people (that is, in His own kingdom), and on thrones of glory" (even royal ones).
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.4, ch.14

{Isa 3:14-15; Isa 10:1-2; Isa 1:17-18}
Location 52317
And by Isaiah how He inveighs against the oppressors of the needy! "What mean ye that ye set fire to my vineyard, and that the spoil of the poor is in your houses? Wherefore do ye beat my people to pieces, and grind the face of the needy?" And again: "Woe unto them that decree unrighteous decrees; for in their decrees they decree wickedness, turning aside the needy from judgment, and taking away their rights from the poor of my people." These righteous judgments He requires for the fatherless also, and the widows, as well as for consolation to the very needy themselves. "Do justice to the fatherless, and deal justly with the widow; and come, let us be reconciled, saith the Lord." To him, for whom in every stage of lowliness there is provided so much of the Creator's compassionate regard, shall be given that kingdom also which is promised by Christ, to whose merciful compassion belong, and for a great while have belonged, those to whom the promise is made.
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.4, ch.14

{Lk 6:21; Isa 5:26; Mt 5:6; Lk 6:21; Isa 65:13; Isa 65:13-14}
Location 52327
it is quite clear that heaven has been as yet the property of no other God whatever, than Him who owns the earth also; quite clear that the Creator has given even the lesser promises (of earthly blessing), in order that I may more readily believe Him concerning His greater promises (of heavenly blessings) also, than (Marcion's god), who has never given proof of his liberality by any preceding bestowal of minor blessings. "Blessed are they that hunger, for they shall be filled." I might connect this clause with the former one, because none but the poor and needy suffer hunger, if the Creator had not specially designed that the promise of a similar blessing should serve as a preparation for the gospel, that so men might know it to be His. For thus does He say, by Isaiah, concerning those whom He was about to call from the ends of the earth- that is, the Gentiles: "Behold, they shall come swiftly with speed:" swiftly, because hastening towards the fulness of the times; with speed, because unclogged by the weights of the ancient law. They shall neither hunger nor thirst. Therefore they shall be filled,- a promise which is made to none but those who hunger and thirst. ... And again He says: "Behold, my servants shall be filled, but ye shall be hungry; behold, my servants shall drink, but ye shall be thirsty." As for these statements of opposites, we shall see whether they are not premonitors of Christ. Meanwhile the promise of fullness to the hungry is a provision of God the Creator. "Blessed are they that weep, for they shall laugh." Turn again to the passage of Isaiah: "Behold, my servants shall exult with joy, but ye shall be ashamed; behold, my servants shall be glad, but ye shall cry for sorrow of heart."
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.4, ch.14

{Ps 126:5; Isa 61:1-3; Lk 6:20-21}
Location 52337
Just as it is said in the 125th Psalm: "They who sow in tears shall reap in joy." Moreover, laughter is as much an accessory to the exulting and glad, as weeping is to the sorrowful and grieving. Therefore the Creator, in foretelling matters for laughter and tears, was the first who said that those who mourned should laugh. Accordingly, He who began (His course) with consolation for the poor, and the humble, and the hungry, and the weeping, was at once eager to represent Himself as Him whom He had pointed out by the mouth of Isaiah: "The Spirit of the Lord is upon me, because He hath anointed me to preach good tidings unto the poor." "Blessed are the needy, because theirs is the kingdom of heaven." "He hath sent me to bind up the broken-hearted." "Blessed are they that hunger, for they shall be filled." "To comfort all that mourn." "Blessed are they that weep, for they shall laugh." "To give unto them that mourn in Sion, beauty (or glory) for ashes, and the oil of joy for mourning, and the garment of praise for the spirit of heaviness."
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.4, ch.14

{Deut 8:12; Isa 39:6; Jer 9:23-24; Isa 3:16-24; Isa 5:14; Lk 6:24; Isa 10:33}
Location 52400
Accordingly, in Deuteronomy, Moses says: "Lest, when thou hast eaten and art full, and hast built goodly houses, and when thy herds and thy flocks multiply, as well as thy silver and thy gold, thine heart be then lifted up, and thou forget the Lord thy God." In similar terms, when king Hezekiah became proud of his treasures, and gloried in them rather than in God before those who had come on an embassy from Babylon, (the Creator) breaks forth against him by the mouth of Isaiah: "Behold, the days come when all that is in thine house, and that which thy fathers have laid up in store, shall be carried to Babylon." So by Jeremiah likewise did He say: "Let not the rich man glory in his riches but let him that glorieth even glory in the Lord." Similarly against the daughters of Sion does He inveigh by Isaiah, when they were haughty through their pomp and the abundance of their riches, just as in another passage He utters His threats against the proud and noble: "Hell hath enlarged herself, and opened her mouth, and down to it shall descend the illustrious, and the great, and the rich man shall be humbled, (this shall be Christ's woe to the rich');" ... 
Concerning whom He says again: "Behold, the Lord of hosts shall confound the pompous together with their strength: those that are lifted up shall be hewn down, and such as are lofty shall fall by the sword." And who are these but the rich?
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.4, ch.15

{Ps 49:16-17; Ps 62:11}
Location 52411
And who are these but the rich? Because they have indeed received their consolation, glory, and honour and a lofty position from their wealth. In Psalm 48, He also turns off our care from these and says: "Be not thou afraid when one is made rich, and when his glory is increased: for when he shall die, he shall carry nothing away; nor shall his glory descend along with him." ... So also in Psalm 61: "Do not desire riches; and if they do yield you their lustre, do not set your heart upon them."
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.4, ch.15

{Am 6:1-6; Lk 6:25}
Location 52414
Lastly, this very same woe is pronounced of old by Amos against the rich, who also abounded in delights. "Woe unto them," says he, "who sleep upon beds of ivory, and deliciously stretch themselves upon their couches; who eat the kids from the flocks of the goats, and sucking calves from the flocks of the heifers, while they chant to the sound of the viol; as if they thought they should continue long, and were not fleeting; who drink their refined wines, and anoint themselves with the costliest ointments."
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.4, ch.15

{Lk 6:25; Isa 65:13; Ps 126:5}
Location 52420
He inflicts a woe also on "the full, because they shall hunger; on those too which laugh now, because they shall mourn." To these will correspond these opposites which occur, as we have seen above, in the benedictions of the Creator: "Behold, my servants shall be full, but ye shall be hungry"- even because ye have been filled; "behold, my servants shall rejoice, but ye shall be ashamed"- even ye who shall mourn, who now are laughing. For as it is written in the psalm, "They who sow in tears shall reap in joy," so does it run in the Gospel: They who sow in laughter, that is, in joy, shall reap in tears. These principles did the Creator lay down of old;
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.4, ch.15

{Lk 6:26; Isa 3:12}
Location 52426
"Woe unto you, when all men shall speak well of you! for so did their fathers to the false prophets." With equal stress does the Creator, by His prophet Isaiah, censure those who seek after human flattery and praise: "O my people, they who call you happy mislead you, and disturb the paths of your feet."
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.4, ch.15

{Jer 17:5; Ps 118:8-9}
Location 52428
In another passage He forbids all implicit trust in man, and likewise in the applause of man; as by the prophet Jeremiah: "Cursed be the man that trusteth in man." Whereas in Psalm cxvii. it is said: "It is better to trust in the Lord than to put confidence in man; it is better to trust in the Lord than to place hope in princes."
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.4, ch.15

{Isa 66:5; Mt 5:44,45}
Location 52438
These commands the Creator included in one precept by His prophet Isaiah: "Say, Ye are our brethren, to those who hate you." For if they who are our enemies, and hate us, and speak evil of us, and calumniate us, are to be called our brethren, surely He did in effect bid us bless them that hate us, and pray for them who calumniate us, when He instructed us to reckon them as brethren.
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.4, ch.16

{Ex 21:24; Lk 6:29}
Location 52441
Well, but Christ plainly teaches a new kind of patience, when He actually prohibits the reprisals which the Creator permitted in requiring "an eye for an eye, and a tooth for a tooth," and bids us, on the contrary, "to him who smiteth us on the one cheek, to offer the other also, and to give up our coat to him that taketh away our cloak." No doubt these are supplementary additions by Christ, but they are quite in keeping with the teaching of the Creator.
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.4, ch.16

{Zech 7:10; Zech 8:17}
Location 52445
When by Zechariah He commanded, "Let none of you imagine evil against his brother," He did not expressly include his neighbour; but then in another passage He says, "Let none of you imagine evil in your hearts against his neighbour."
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.4, ch.16

{Ex 21:24; Lev 24:20; Deut 19:21; Mt 5:38}
Location 52449
who forbids not only all reprisals, but even a revengeful thought or recollection of an injury, in so far does it become plain to us in what sense He required "an eye for an eye and a tooth for a tooth,"- not, indeed, for the purpose of permitting the repetition of the injury by retaliating it, which it virtually prohibited when it forbade vengeance; but for the purpose of restraining the injury in the first instance, which it had forbidden on pain of retaliation or reciprocity; so that every man, in view of the permission to inflict a second (or retaliatory) injury, might abstain from the commission of the first (or provocative) wrong.
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.4, ch.16

{Mt 5:17}
Location 52460
Thus, whatever (new provision) Christ introduced, He did it not in opposition to the Law, but rather in furtherance of it, without at all impairing the prescription of the Creator.
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.4, ch.16

{Lk 6:30; Deut 15:4; Deut 15:7-8; Mt 15:24-28; Mt 10:5-7; Hos 1:6; Hos 1:9}
Location 52471
"Give to everyone that asketh of thee"- to the indigent of course, or rather to the indigent more especially, although to the affluent likewise. But in order that no man may be indigent, you have in Deuteronomy a provision commanded by the Creator to the creditor. "There shall not be in thine hand an indigent man; so that the Lord thy God shall bless thee with blessings,"- thee meaning the creditor to whom it was owing that the man was not indigent. But more than this. To one who does not ask, He bids a gift to be given. "Let there be, not," He says, "a poor man in thine hand;" in other words, see that there be not, so far as thy will can prevent; ... The following words also: "If there be among you a poor man of thy brethren, thou shalt not turn away thine heart, nor shut thine hand from thy poor brother. But thou shalt open thine hand wide unto him, and shalt surely lend him as much as he wanteth." ... Accordingly, the Creator, when following the course of nature, taught in the first instance kindness to neighbours, intending afterwards to enjoin it towards strangers; ... He limited charity first to the Jews, but afterwards extended it to the whole race of mankind.
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.4, ch.16

{Isa 58:7; Ezek 18:7; Lk 6:30; Jas 1:27}
Location 52507
for He always and everywhere enjoined that the poor, and the orphan, and the widow should be protected, assisted, refreshed; thus by Isaiah He says: "Deal thy bread to the hungry, and them that are houseless bring into thine house; when thou seest the naked, cover him." By Ezekiel also He thus describes the just man: "His bread will he give to the hungry, and the naked will he cover with a garment." That teaching was even then a sufficient inducement
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.4, ch.16

{Mt 5:17; Lk 6:34; Ezek 18:8; Ezek 18:16; Deut 24:12-13; Deut 15:2; Gal 3:24}
"And if ye lend to them of whom ye hope to receive, what thank have ye?" ... Ezekiel, in which He says of the before-mentioned just man, "He hath not given his money upon usury, nor will he take any increase"- meaning the redundance of interest, which is usury.
... The first step was to eradicate the fruit of the money lent, the more easily to accustom a man to the loss, should it happen, of the money itself, the interest of which he had learned to lose. ... Now this, we affirm, was the function of the Law as preparatory to the gospel.
... Ezekiel quoted above He says, "And thou shalt restore the pledge of the loan"- to him, certainly, who is incapable of repayment, because, as a matter of course, He would not anyhow prescribe the restoration of a pledge to one who was solvent. Much more clearly is it enjoined in Deuteronomy: "Thou shalt not sleep upon his pledge; thou shalt be sure to return to him his garment about sunset, and he shall sleep in his own garment." Clearer still is a former passage: "Thou shalt remit every debt which thy neighbour oweth thee; and of thy brother thou shalt not require it, because it is called the release of the Lord thy God." Now, when He commands that a debt be remitted to a man who shall be unable to pay it (for it is a still stronger argument when He forbids its being asked for from a man who is even able to repay it), what else does He teach than that we should lend to those of whom we cannot receive again, inasmuch as He has imposed so great a loss on lending?
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.4, ch.17

{Lk 6:36; Isa 58:7; Isa 1:17; Hos 6:6}
Location 52544
Compassion also does He teach: "Be ye merciful," says He, "as your Father also that had mercy upon you." This injunction will be of a piece with, "Deal thy bread to the hungry; and if he be houseless, bring him into thine house; and if thou seest the naked, cover him;" also with, "Judge the fatherless, plead with the widow." I recognise here that ancient doctrine of Him who "prefers mercy to sacrifice."
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.4, ch.17

{Isa 32:9-10; Lk 8:1-3; Mt 27:55; Lk 23:49; }
Location 52626
The fact that certain rich women clave to Christ, "which ministered unto Him of their substance," amongst whom was the wife of the king's steward, is a subject of prophecy. By Isaiah the Lord called these wealthy ladies-" Rise up, ye women that are at ease, and hear my voice"- that He might prove them first as disciples, and then as assistants and helpers: "Daughters, hear my words in hope; this day of the year cherish the memory of, in labour with hope." For it was "in labour" that they followed Him, and "with hope" did they minister to Him.
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.4, ch.19

{Isa 6:9; Lk 8:8; Lk 8:18}
Location 52634
First came, "Ye shall hear with the ear, but shall not understand;" then followed, "He that hath ears to hear, let him hear." For they willfully refused to hear, although they had ears. He, however, was teaching them that it was the ears of the heart which were necessary; and with these the Creator had said that they would not hear. Therefore it is that He adds by His Christ, "Take heed how ye hear," and hear not,- meaning, of course, with the hearing of the heart, not of the ear.
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.4, ch.19

{Lk 8:18}
Location 52639
"Whosoever hath, to him shall be given; and whosoever hath not, from him shall be taken even that which he seemeth to have." What shall be given? The increase of faith, or understanding, or even salvation. ... What shall be taken away? That, of course, which shall be given.
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.4, ch.19

{Lk 2:1}
* "C. Sentius Saturninus, a consular, held this census of the whole empire as principal augur, because Augustus determined to impart the sanction of religion to his institution. The agent through whom Saturninus carried out the census in Judæa was the governor Cyrenius, according to Luke, chap. ii."-FR. JUNIUS. Tertullian mentions Sentius Saturninus again in De Pallio, i. Tertullian's statement in the text has weighed with Sanclemente and others, who suppose that Saturninus was governor of Judæa at the time of our Lord's birth, which they place in 747 A.U.C.  "It is evident, however," says Wieseler, "that this argument is far from decisive; for the New Testament itself supplies far better aids for determining this question than the discordant ecclesiastical traditions-different fathers giving different dates, which might be appealed to with equal justice; while Tertullian is even inconsistent with himself, since in his treatise Adv. Jud. viii., he gives 751 A.U.C. as the year of our Lord's birth" (Wieseler's Chronological Synopsis by Venables, p. 99, note 2). This Sentius Saturninus filled the office of governor of Syria, 744-748. For the elaborate argument of Aug. W. Zumpt, by which he defends St. Luke's chronology, and goes far to prove that Publius Sulpicius Quirinus (or "Cyrenius") was actually the governor of Syria at the time of the Lord's birth, the reader may be referred to a careful abridgment by the translator of Wieseler's work, pp. 129-135.
Location 52664
But there is historical proof that at this very time a census had been taken in Judaea by Sentius Saturninus*, which might have satisfied their inquiry respecting the family and descent of Christ.
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.4, ch.19

{Mt 12:48; Mt 10:37}
Location 52667
"Who is my mother, and who are my brethren?" In this manner heretics either wrest plain and simple words. ...  "Who is my mother or my brethren?" It seems as if His language amounted to a denial of His family and His birth; but it arose actually from the absolute nature of the case, and the conditional sense in which His words were to be explained. He was justly indignant, that persons so very near to Him "stood without," while strangers were within hanging on His words, especially as they wanted to call Him away from the solemn work He had in hand. He did not so much deny as disavow them. And therefore, when to the previous question, "Who is my mother, and who are my brethren?" He added the answer "None but they who hear my words and do them," He transferred the names of blood-relationship to others, whom He judged to be more closely related to Him by reason of their faith. ... [Here is an] actual example, that "whosoever preferred father or mother or brethren to the Word of God, was not a disciple worthy of Him."
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.4, ch.19

{Mt 10:37}
Location 52676
That He adopted others only confirmed those in their relationship to Him whom He refused because of their offence, and for whom He substituted the others, not as being truer relatives, but worthier ones. Finally, it was no great matter if He did prefer to kindred (that) faith which it did not possess.
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.4, ch.19

{Lk 11:41-42; Mt 5:17}
Location 53142
For He subjoins the command: "Give what ye possess as alms, and all things shall be clean unto you." ... For how could He have felt aversion to the Law, who used with so much earnestness to upbraid them for passing over its weightier matters, alms- giving, hospitality, and the love of God?
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.4, ch.27

{Lk 11:52}
Location 53168
Note: Vulgate says: vae vobis legis peritis;  "legis peritis" =  "a person skilled in the Law"
Note: Wycliffe says: "Woe to you, wise men of the law [wise men of law], for ye have taken away the key of knowing;" Wycliffe Bible (WYC), 2001 by Terence P. Noble
Note: Tyndale says: "Woe be to you lawyers"
Tertullian:
What "key," indeed, was it which these lawyers had, but the interpretation of the Law? Into the perception of this they neither entered themselves, even because they did not believe (for "unless ye believe, ye shall not understand"); nor did they permit others to enter, because they preferred to teach them for commandments even the doctrines of men.
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.4, ch.27

{Ex 2:13-14; Lk 12:13-14}
Location 53217
Moses voluntarily interferes with brothers who were quarrelling, and chides the offender: "Wherefore smitest thou thy fellow?" He is, however, rejected by him: "Who made thee a prince or a judge over us?" Christ, on the contrary, when requested by a certain man to compose a strife between him and his brother about dividing an inheritance, refused His assistance, although in so honest a cause.
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.4, ch.28

{1 Sam 2:8; Ps 113:7; Lk 1:52; Lk 12:16-20; Isa 39:1-8}
Location 53226
I think that we have already, in another passage, sufficiently shown that the glory of riches is condemned by our God, "who putteth down the mighty from their throne, and exalts the poor from the dunghill." From Him, therefore, will proceed the parable of the rich man,
... God said: "Thou fool, this night shall they require thy soul of thee; then whose shall those things be which thou hast provided?" It was just in the like manner that the king Hezekiah heard from Isaiah the sad doom of his kingdom, when he gloried, before the envoys of Babylon, in his treasures and the deposits of his precious things.
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.4, ch.28

{Lk 12:35-36}
Location 53261
We ought "to have our loins girded:" in other words, we are to be free from the embarrassments of a perplexed and much occupied life; "to have our lights burning," that is, our minds kindled by faith, and resplendent with the works of truth. And thus "to wait for our Lord," that is, Christ. Whence "returning?" If "from the wedding," He is the Christ of the Creator, for the wedding is His.
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.4, ch.29

{Lk 12:49}
Location 53289
Your Christ proclaims, "I am come to send fire on the earth." That most lenient being, the lord who has no hell, not long before had restrained his disciples from demanding fire on the churlish village. Whereas He burnt up Sodom and Gomorrah with a tempest of fire.
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.4, ch.29

{Lk 12:51}
Location 53296
"Suppose that I am come to give peace on earth? I tell you, Nay; but rather division." It is written "a sword," but Marcion makes an emendation of the word, just as if a division were not the work of the sword. He, therefore, who refused to give peace, intended also the fire of destruction.
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.4, ch.29

{Lk 12:58-59}
Location 53309
For the Judge, who commits to prison, and allows no release out of it without the payment of "the very last mite," they [the Marcionites] treat of in the person of the Creator, with the view of disparaging Him. Which cavil, however, I deem it necessary to meet with the same answer. For as often as the Creator's severity is paraded before us, so often is Christ (shown to be) His, to whom He urges submission by the motive of fear.
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.4, ch.29

{Lk 14:12-14; Isa 58:7}
Location 53348
What kind of persons does He bid should be invited to a dinner or a supper? Precisely such as he had pointed out by Isaiah: "Deal thy bread to the hungry man; and the beggars- even such as have no home- bring in to thine house," because, no doubt, they are "unable to recompense" your act of humanity.
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.4, ch.31

{Jer 7:23-24; Jer 11:8; Lk 14:18-20; Jer 7:25; Jer 25:4; Jer 26:5; Jer 35:15; Jer 44:4; Mt 22:4; Lk 14:19}
Location 53364
He said by Jeremiah: "Obey my voice, and I will be your God, and ye shall be my people; and ye shall walk in all my ways, which I have commanded you." This is the invitation of God. "But," says He, "they hearkened not, nor inclined their ear." This is the refusal of the people. "They departed, and walked everyone in the imagination of their evil heart." "I have bought a field- and I have bought some oxen- and I have married a wife." And still He urges them: "I have sent unto you all my servants the prophets,
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.4, ch.31

{Lk 14:21; Jer 2:31; Lk 14:23; Deut 32:20-21}
Location 53370
commanded them to invite out of "the streets and lanes of the city." Let us see whether this is not the same in purport as His words by Jeremiah: "Have I been a wilderness to the house of Israel, or a land left uncultivated?" That is to say: "Then have I none whom I may call to me; have I no place whence I may bring them?" "Since my people have said, We will come no more unto thee." Therefore He sent out to call others, but from the same city. My third remark is this, that although the place abounded with people, He yet commanded that they gather men from the highways and the hedges. In other words, we are now gathered out of the Gentile strangers; with that jealous resentment, no doubt, which He expressed in Deuteronomy: "I will hide my face from them, and I will show them what shall happen in the last days (how that others shall possess their place); for they are a froward generation, children in whom is no faith. They have moved me to jealousy by that which is no god, and they have provoked me to anger with their idols; and I will move them to jealousy with those which are not a people: I will provoke them to anger with a foolish nation"- even with us, whose hope the Jews still entertain.
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.4, ch.31

{Isa 25:6; Mt 26:29}
Location 53388
Meanwhile, you who interpret the call to this supper as an invitation to a heavenly banquet of spiritual satiety and pleasure, must remember that the earthly promises also of wine and oil and corn, and even of the city, are equally employed by the Creator as figures of spiritual things.
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.4, ch.31

{Mt. 26:63-64; Mt 27:11; Lk 23:3; Jn 18:37}
Location 53924
They would, however, have burdened Him with some other title, if they had been uncertain whether He had called Himself the Son of God- if He had not pronounced the words, "Ye say that I am," so as (to admit) that He was that which they said He was. Likewise, when Pirate asked Him, "Art thou Christ (the King)?" He answered, as He had before (to the Jewish council) "Thou sayest that I am" in order that He might not seem to have been driven by a fear of his power to give him a fuller answer.
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.4, ch.42

{Ps 2:1-2; Mt 27:20-24; Lk 23:8-9}
Location 53928
The Lord Himself comes to a trial with "the elders and rulers of the people," as Isaiah predicted. And then He fulfilled all that had been written of His passion. At that time "the heathen raged, and the people imagined vain things; the kings of the earth set themselves, and the rulers gathered themselves together against the Lord and against His Christ." The heathen were Pilate and the Romans; the people were the tribes of Israel; the kings were represented in Herod, and the rulers in the chief priests.
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.4, ch.42

{Hos 10:6; Lk 23:8-9; Isa 53:7; Isa 50:4; Ps 22:15}
Location 53932
When, indeed, He was sent to Herod gratuitously by Pilate, the words of Hosea were accomplished, for he had prophesied of Christ: "And they shall carry Him bound as a present to the king." Herod was "exceeding glad" when he saw Jesus, but he heard not a word from Him. For, "as a lamb before the shearer is dumb, so He opened not His mouth," because "the Lord had given to Him a disciplined tongue, that he might know how and when it behooved Him to speak"- even that "tongue which clove to His jaws," as the Psalm said it should, through His not speaking.
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.4, ch.42

{Lk 23:33; Isa 53:12}
Location 53937
Moreover two malefactors are crucified around Him, in order that He might be reckoned amongst the transgressors.
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.4, ch.42

{Isa 50:3; Am 8:9; Lk 23:45; Ezek 11:22-23; Isa 1:8; Mt 27:45; Mt 27:51}
Location 53945
These proofs would still have been suitable for me, even if they had not been the subject of prophecy. Isaiah says: "I will clothe the heavens with blackness." This will be the day, concerning which Amos also writes: And it shall come to pass in that day, saith the Lord, that the sun shall go down at noon and the earth shall be dark in the clear day." (At noon) the veil of the temple was rent" by the escape of the cherubim, which "left the daughter of Sion as a cottage in a vineyard, as a lodge in a garden of cucumbers."
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.4, ch.42

{Lk 24:1; Hos 5:15; Hos 6:1-2; Lk 24:3; Isa 57:2; 1 Cor 15:4}
Location 53966
It was very meet that the man who buried the Lord should thus be noticed in prophecy, and thenceforth be "blessed;" since prophecy does not omit the (pious) office of the women who resorted before day-break to the sepulcher with the spices which they had prepared. For of this incident it is said by Hosea: "To seek my face they will watch till day-light, saying unto me, Come, and let us return to the Lord: for He hath taken away, and He will heal us; He hath smitten, and He will bind us up; after two days will He revive us: in the third day He will raise us up." For who can refuse to believe that these words often revolved in the thought of those women between the sorrow of that desertion with which at present they seemed to themselves to have been smitten by the Lord, and the hope of the resurrection itself, by which they rightly supposed that all would be restored to them? But when "they found not the body (of the Lord Jesus)," "His sepulture was removed from the midst of them," according to the prophecy of Isaiah.
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.4, ch.43

{Lk 24:4; Deut 17:6; Deut 19:15; Mt 18:16; 2 Cor 13:1}
Location 53973
"Two angels however, appeared there." For just so many honorary companions were required by the word of God, which usually prescribes "two witnesses."
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.4, ch.43

{Isa 27:11}
Location 53975
Moreover, the women, returning from the sepulcher, and from this vision of the angels, were foreseen by Isaiah, when he says, "Come, ye women, who return from the vision;" that is, "come," to report the resurrection of the Lord.
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.4, ch.43

{Lk 24:47; Mt 28:19; Ps 19:4}
Location 54004
when He sent forth His apostles to preach His gospel "among all nations;" for He thus fulfilled the psalm: "Their sound is gone out through all the earth, and their words to the end of the world."
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.4, ch.43

{Gal 1:10-12; Marcion; Paul; Twelve Apostles; 1 Sam 24:1-22; Gen 49:27; Lk 21:8; 1 Cor 1:1; 1 Cor 9:1}
Since therefore I am brought, in the course of my little work, to this point, I require to know of Marcion the origin of his apostle even- I, who am to some degree a new disciple, the follower of no other master; who at the same time can believe nothing, except that nothing ought to be believed hastily (and that I may further say is hastily believed, which is believed without any examination of its beginning); in short, I who have the best reason possible for bringing this inquiry to a most careful solution, since a man is affirmed to me to be an apostle whom I do not find mentioned in the Gospel in the catalogue of the apostles. Indeed, when I hear that this man was chosen by the Lord after He had attained His rest in heaven, I feel that a kind of improvidence is imputable to Christ, for not knowing before that this man was necessary to Him; and because He thought that he must be added to the apostolic body in the way of a fortuitous encounter rather than a deliberate selection; by necessity (so to speak), and not voluntary choice, although the members of the apostolate had been duly ordained, and were now dismissed to their several missions. Wherefore, O shipmaster of Pontus, if you have never taken on board your small craft any contraband goods or smuggler's cargo, if you have never thrown overboard or tampered with a freight, you are still more careful and conscientious, I doubt not, in divine things; and so I should be glad if you would inform us under what bill of lading you admitted the Apostle Paul on board, who ticketed him, what owner forwarded him, who handed him to you, that so you may land him without any misgiving, lest he should turn out to belong to him, who can substantiate his claim to him by producing all his apostolic writings. He professes himself to be "an apostle"- to use his own, words-" not of men, nor by man, but by Jesus Christ." Of course, any one may make a profession concerning himself; but his profession is only rendered valid by the authority of a second person. One man signs, another countersigns; one man appends his seal, another registers in the public records. No one is at once a proposer and a seconder to himself. Besides, you have read, no doubt, that "many shall come, saying, I am Christ." Now if anyone can pretend that he is Christ, how much more might a man profess to be an apostle of Christ! But still, for my own part, I appear in the character of a disciple and an inquirer; that so I may even thus both refute your belief, who have nothing to support it, and confound your shamelessness, who make claims without possessing the means of establishing them. Let there be a Christ, let there be an apostle, although of another god; but what matter? since they are only to draw their proofs out of the Testament of the Creator. Because even the book of Genesis so long ago promised me the Apostle Paul. For among the types and prophetic blessings which he pronounced over his sons, Jacob, when he turned his attention to Benjamin, exclaimed, "Benjamin shall ravish as a wolf; in the morning he shall devour the prey, and at night he shall impart nourishment." He foresaw that Paul would arise out of the tribe of Benjamin, a voracious wolf, devouring his prey in the morning: in order words, in the early period of his life he would devastate the Lord's sheep, as a persecutor of the churches; but in the evening he would give them nourishment, which means that in his declining years he would educate the fold of Christ, as the teacher of the Gentiles. Then, again, in Saul's conduct towards David, exhibited first in violent persecution of him, and then in remorse and reparation, on his receiving from him good for evil, we have nothing else than an anticipation of Paul in Saul- belonging, too, as they did, to the same tribe- and of Jesus in David, from whom He descended according to the Virgin's genealogy. Should you, however, disapprove of these types, the Acts of the Apostles, at all events, have handed down to me this career of Paul, which you must not refuse to accept. Thence I demonstrate that from a persecutor he became "an apostle, not of men, neither by man;" thence am I led to believe the Apostle himself; thence do I find reason for rejecting your defence of him, and for bearing fearlessly your taunt. "Then you deny the Apostle Paul." I do not calumniate him whom I defend. I deny him, to compel you to the proof of him. I deny him, to convince you that he is mine. If you have regard to our belief you should admit the particulars which comprise it. If you challenge us to your belief, (pray) tell us what things constitute its basis. Either prove the truth of what you believe, or failing in your proof, (tell us) how you believe.
FN: Marcion is frequently called "Ponticus Nauclerus," probably less on account of his own connection with a seafaring life, than that of his countrymen, who were great sailors.  Comp. book. i. 18. (sub fin.) and book iii. 6. [pp. 284, 325.](
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.5, ch.1

{Lk 3:23}
we have nothing else than an anticipation of Paul in Saul- belonging, too, as they did, to the same tribe- and of Jesus in David, from whom He descended according to the Virgin's genealogy.

{Marcion; 2 Pet 3:15-16}
Location 54061
we shall draw our evidence from the epistles of St. Paul himself. Now, the garbled form in which we have found the heretic's Gospel will have already prepared us to expect to find the epistles also mutilated by him with like perverseness- and that even as respects their number.
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.5, ch.1

{Gal 3:23-25; Gal 4:1-5}
Location 54066
The epistle which we also allow to be the most decisive against Judaism, is that wherein the apostle instructs the Galatians. For the abolition of the ancient Law we fully admit, and hold that it actually proceeds from the dispensation of the Creator,
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.5, ch.2

{Lk 16:16; Gal 3:23-25}
Location 54070
whilst Christ marks the period of the separation when He says, "The law and the prophets were until John"- thus making the Baptist the limit between the two dispensations of the old things then terminating- and the new things then beginning,
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.5, ch.2

{Gal 5:1-11; Gal 4:20-21}
Location 54075
the fond assumption of the Galatians, which led them to suppose that faith in Christ (the Creator's Christ, of course) was obligatory, but without annulling the Law, because it still appeared to them a thing incredible that the Law should be set aside by its own author.
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.5, ch.2

{Gal 2:19-21; Rom 6:14}
Location 54089
it is the office of Christ's gospel to call men from the Law to grace, not from the Creator to another god.
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.5, ch.2

{Isa 40:9[LXX]; Isa 52:7; Isa 42:4; Mt 12:21}
*We have here an instance of the high authority of the Septuagint version. It comes from the Seventy: Kai epi to onomati aftou ethne elpiousin. (Isa. xlii. 4.) From this Tertullian, as usual, quoted it. But what is much more important, St. Matthew has adopted it; see chap. xii, ver. 21. This beautiful promise of the Creator does not occur in its well-known form in the Hebrew original.
Location 54092
For the Creator Himself promises the gospel, when He says by Isaiah: "Get thee up into the high mountain, thou that bringest to Sion good tidings; lift up thy voice with strength, thou that bringest the gospel to Jerusalem." Also when, with respect to the apostles personally, He says, "How beautiful are the feet of them that preach the gospel of peace, that bring good tidings of good"- even proclaiming the gospel to the Gentiles, because He also says, "In His name shall the Gentiles trust;*" that is, in the name of Christ, to whom He says, "I have given thee as a light of the Gentiles." However, you [Marcion] will have it that it is the gospel of a new god which was then set forth by the apostle.
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.5, ch.2

{Gal 1:11-24; Acts 15:5-29; Paul}
Location 54105
He then cursorily touches on his own conversion from a persecutor to an apostle- confirming thereby the Acts of the Apostles, in which book may be found the very subject of this epistle, how that certain persons interposed, and said that men ought to be circumcised, and that the Law of Moses was to be observed; and how the apostles, when consulted, determined, by the authority of the Holy Ghost, that "a yoke should not be put upon men's necks which their fathers even had not been able to bear."
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.5, ch.2

{Acts 15:5-29; Gal 2:1-2}
Location 54112
as if Paul did not follow the preaching of the apostles when he received from them the prescription of not teaching the Law.
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.5, ch.2

{Gal 2:1-2}
Location 54117
But with regard to the countenance of Peter and the rest of the apostles, he tells us that "fourteen years after he went up to Jerusalem," in order to confer with them about the rule which he followed in his gospel, lest perchance he should all those years have been running, and be running still, in vain, (which would be the case,) of course, if his preaching of the gospel fell short of their method. So great had been his desire to be approved and supported by those
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.5, ch.3

{Gal 2:3; Introduction to Galatians; Introduction to Romans; Acts 15:1}
Location 54121
When indeed he says, that "neither was Titus circumcised," he for the first time shows us that circumcision was the only question connected with the maintenance of the Law,
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.5, ch.3

{Gal 2:4-5; Gal 2:2; Gal 2:9-10}
Location 54131
They therefore gave way (in a partial concession), because there were persons whose weak faith required consideration. For their rudimentary belief, which was still in suspense about the observance of the Law, deserved this concessive treatment*, when even the apostle himself had some suspicion that he might have run, and be still running, in vain. Accordingly, the false brethren who were the spies of their Christian liberty must be thwarted in their efforts to bring it under the yoke of their own Judaism before that Paul discovered whether his labour had been in vain, before that those who preceded him in the apostolate gave him their right hands of fellowship, before that he entered on the office of preaching to the Gentiles, according to their arrangement with him.
NOTE: * The following statement will throw light upon the character of the two classes of Jewish professors of Christianity referred to by Tertullian: "A pharisaic section was sheltered in its bosom (of the church at Jerusalem), which continually strove to turn Christianity into a sect of Judaism.  These men were restless agitators, animated by the bitterest sectarian spirit; and although they were numerically a small party, yet we know the power of the turbulent minority. But besides these Judaizing zealots, there was a large proportion of the Christians at Jerusalem, whose Christianity, though more sincere than that of those just mentioned, was yet very weak and imperfect...Many of them still only knew of a Christ after the flesh-a Saviour of Israel-a Jewish Messiah. Their minds were in a state of transition between the Law and the gospel; and it was of great consequence not to shock their prejudices too rudely; lest they should be tempted to make shipwreck of their faith and renounce their Christianity altogether." These were they whose prejudices required to be wisely consulted in things which did not touch the foundation of the gospel. (Conybeare and Howson's St. Paul, People's Edition, vol. ii. pp. 259, 260.)
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.5, ch.3

{Acts 16:3; Acts 21:23-26; 1 Cor 9:20}
Location 54136
He therefore made some concession, as was necessary, for a time; and this was the reason why he had Timothy circumcised, and the Nazarites introduced into the temple, which incidents are described in the Acts. Their truth may be inferred from their agreement with the apostle's own profession, how "to the Jews he became as a Jew, that he might gain the Jews"
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.5, ch.3

{Gal 2:12; Gal 2:14}
Location 54145
It is thus certain that the question was one which simply regarded the Law, while at the same time it is apparent what portion of the Law it was convenient to have observed. Paul, however, censures Peter for not walking straightforwardly according to the truth of the gospel. No doubt he blames him; but it was solely because of his inconsistency in the matter of "eating," which he varied according to the sort of persons (whom he associated with) "fearing them which were of the circumcision," but not on account of any perverse opinion touching another god. For if such a question had arisen, others also would have been "resisted face to face" by the man who had not even spared Peter on the comparatively small matter of his doubtful conversation.
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.5, ch.3

{Gal 2:18; Lk 3:4-5; Ps 2:3; Ps 2:1-2; Gal 2:16; Gal 3:11; Hab 2:4}
Location 54153
Justly, therefore, did he refuse to "build up again (the structure of the Law) which he had overthrown." The Law, indeed, had to be overthrown, from the moment when John "cried in the wilderness, Prepare ye the ways of the Lord," that valleys and hills and mountains may be filled up and levelled, and the crooked and the rough ways be made straight and smooth- in other words, that the difficulties of the Law might be changed into the facilities of the gospel. For he remembered that the time was come of which the Psalm spake, "Let us break their bands asunder, and cast off their yoke from us;" since the time when "the nations became tumultuous, and the people imagined vain counsels;" when "the kings of the earth stood up, and the rulers were gathered together against the Lord, and against His Christ," in order that thenceforward man might be justified by the liberty of faith, not by servitude to the Law, "because the just shall live by his faith." Now, although the prophet Habakkuk first said this, yet you have the apostle here confirming the prophets, even as Christ did.
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.5, ch.3

{Gal 3:7; Gal 3:9; Gal 3:29; Introduction to Romans; Introduction to Galatians; Rom 4:9; Rom 2:29; Mt 3:9}
Location 54182
did he not seek thereby to constitute us the children of Abraham, who had believed previous to his circumcision in the flesh?
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.5, ch.3

{Gal 4:5; Isa 40:4; Isa 2:3; Gal 4:5; Isa 42:4; Isa 42:6; Gal 4:6; Joel 3:28; Acts 2:17}
Location 54204
But for what end did He send His Son? "To redeem them that were under the Law," in other words, to "make the crooked ways straight, and the rough places smooth," as Isaiah says- in order that old things might pass away, and a new course begin, even "the new law out of Zion, and the word of the Lord from Jerusalem," and "that we might receive the adoption of sons," that is, the Gentiles, who once were not sons. For He is to be "the light of the Gentiles," and "in His name shall the Gentiles trust." That we may have, therefore the assurance that we are the children of God, "He hath sent forth His Spirit into our hearts, crying, Abba, Father." For "in the last days," saith He, "I will pour out of my Spirit upon all flesh."
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.5, ch.4

{Gal 4:10; Jn 19:31; Isa 1:13-14; Am 5:21; Hos 2:11}
Location 54214
He tells us himself clearly enough what he means by "elements," even the rudiments of the Law: "Ye observe days, and months, and times, and years"- the sabbaths, I suppose, and "the preparations," and the fasts, and the "high days." For the cessation of even these, no less than of circumcision, was appointed by the Creator's decrees, who had said by Isaiah, "Your new moons, and your sabbaths, and your high days I cannot bear; your fasting, and feasts, and ceremonies my soul hateth;" also by Amos, "I hate, I despise your feast-days, and I will not smell in your solemn assemblies;" and again by Hosea, "I will cause to cease all her mirth, and her feast-days, and her sabbaths, and her new moons, and all her solemn assemblies." The institutions which He set up Himself, you ask, did He then destroy? Yes, rather than any other.
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.5, ch.4

{Gal 5:1; Gal 4:22-31}
Location 54231
In this passage he has undoubtedly shown that Christianity had a noble birth, being sprung, as the mystery of the allegory indicates, from that son of Abraham who was born of the free woman; whereas from the son of the bond maid came the legal bondage of Judaism. Both dispensations, therefore, emanate from that same God by whom, as we have found, they were both sketched out beforehand. When he speaks of "the liberty wherewith Christ hath made us free," does not the very phrase indicate that He is the Liberator who was once the Master? For Galba himself never liberated slaves which were not his own, even when about to restore free men to their liberty. By Him, therefore, will liberty be bestowed, at whose command lay the enslaving power of the Law.
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.5, ch.4

{Gal 5:1}
Location 54237
It was not meet that those who had received liberty should be "entangled again with the yoke of bondage"- that is, of the Law;
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.5, ch.4

{Ps 2:2-3; Jer 4:4; Deut 10:16; Gal 5:6; Gal 5:2}
Location 54238
prophecy accomplished: "Let us break their bands asunder, and cast away their cords from us, since the rulers have gathered themselves together against the Lord and against His Christ." All those, therefore, who had been delivered from the yoke of slavery he would earnestly have to obliterate the very mark of slavery- even circumcision, on the authority of the prophet's prediction. He remembered how that Jeremiah had said, "Circumcise the foreskins of your heart;" as Moses likewise had enjoined, "Circumcise your hard hearts"- not the literal flesh. If, now, he were for excluding circumcision, as the messenger of a new god, why does he say that "in Christ neither circumcision availeth anything, nor uncircumcision?"
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.5, ch.4

{Gal 5:14}
Location 54253
If, indeed, he will have it that by the words "it is fulfilled" it is implied that the Law no longer has to be fulfilled, then of course he does not mean that I should any more love my neighbour as myself, since this precept must have ceased together with the Law. But no! we must evermore continue to observe this commandment.
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.5, ch.4

{Gal 6:14}
Location 54266
"the world is crucified unto me," who am a servant of the Creator-" the world," (I say,) but not the God who made the world-" and I unto the world," not unto the God who made the world. The world, in the apostle's sense, here means life and conversation according to worldly principles; it is in renouncing these that we and they are mutually crucified and mutually slain.
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.5, ch.4

{1 Cor 1:3; Unbelieving Jews; Gal 1:3; Grace}
Location 54275
My preliminary remarks on the preceding epistle called me away from treating of its superscription, for I was sure that another opportunity would occur for considering the matter, it being of constant recurrence, and in the same form too, in every epistle. The point, then, is, that it is not (the usual) health which the apostle prescribes for those to whom he writes, but "grace and peace." I do not ask, indeed, what a destroyer of Judaism has to do with a formula which the Jews still use. For to this day they salute each other with the greeting of "peace," and formerly in their Scriptures they did the same. ... For the herald of good, that is, of God's "grace" was well aware that along with it "peace" also was to be proclaimed. ... then that "grace and peace" are not only His who had them published, but His likewise to whom offence had been given. For neither does grace exist, except after offence; nor peace, except after war.
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.5, ch.5

{1 Cor 1:21; Greek Word Study: World}
Location 54301
"For after that, in the wisdom of God, the world by wisdom knew not God, it pleased God by the foolishness of preaching to save them that believe." But first a word about the expression "the world;" because in this passage particularly, the heretics expend a great deal of their subtlety in showing that by world is meant the lord of the world. We, however, understand the term to apply to any person that is in the world, by a simple idiom of human language, which often substitutes that which contains for that which is contained. "The circus shouted," "The forum spoke," and "The basilica murmured," are well-known expressions, meaning that the people in these places did so. Since then the man, not the god, of the world in his wisdom knew not God, whom indeed he ought to have known (both the Jew by his knowledge of the Scriptures, and all the human race by their knowledge of God's works), therefore that God, who was not acknowledged in His wisdom, resolved to smite men's knowledge with His foolishness, by saving all those who believe in the folly of the preached cross.
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.5, ch.5

{1 Cor 1:25}
Location 54316
Now, what is that "foolishness of God which is wiser than men," but the cross and death of Christ? What is that "weakness of God which is stronger than men," but the nativity and incarnation of God?
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.5, ch.5

{1 Cor 3:10; Isa 3:3; 1 Cor 3:11; Isa 28:16}
Location 54378
For when (the apostle) calls himself "a wise master-builder," we find that the Creator by Isaiah designates the teacher who sketches out the divine discipline by the same title, "I will take away from Judah the cunning artificer," etc. And was it not Paul himself who was there foretold, destined "to be taken away from Judah"- that is, from Judaism- for the erection of Christianity, in order "to lay that only foundation, which is Christ?" Of this work the Creator also by the same prophet says, "Behold, I lay in Sion for a foundation a precious stone and honourable; and he that rests thereon shall not be confounded."
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.5, ch.6

{1 Cor 4:9; Greek Word Study: World}
Location 54403
Marcion's argument: "But here, at least, you say he interprets the world to be the God thereof, when he says: "We are made a spectacle unto the world, and to angels, and to men." For if by world he had meant the people thereof, he would not have afterwards specially mentioned "men." 
[Tertullian's reply:] To prevent, however, your using such an argument as this, the Holy Ghost has providentially explained the meaning of the passage thus: "We are made a spectacle to the world," i.e. "both to angels," who minister therein, "and to men," who are the objects of their ministration.
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.5, ch.7

{1 Cor 6:15-20; Ransom}
Location 54422
But, in truth, Christ had wherewithal to redeem us; and since He has redeemed, at a great price, these bodies of ours, against which fornication must not be committed (because they are now members of Christ, and not our own), surely He will secure, on His own account, the safety of those whom He made His own at so much cost!
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.5, ch.7

{1 Cor 7:7-9; 1 Cor 7:13-14; 1 Cor 7:27; Marcion; 1 Tim 4:1-3}
Location 54425
We must now encounter the subject of marriage, which Marcion, more continent than the apostle, prohibits. For the apostle, although preferring the grace of continence, yet permits the contraction of marriage and the enjoyment of it, and advises the continuance therein rather than the dissolution thereof. Christ plainly forbids divorce, Moses unquestionably permits it. Now, when Marcion wholly prohibits all carnal intercourse to the faithful (for we will say nothing about his catechumens), and when he prescribes repudiation of all engagements before marriage, whose teaching does he follow, that of Moses or of Christ?
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.5, ch.7

{1 Cor 7:10-11}
Location 54430
Even Christ, however, when He here commands "the wife not to depart from her husband, or if she depart, to remain unmarried or be reconciled to her husband," both permitted divorce [Latin: repudium. See my Word Study], which indeed He never absolutely prohibited, and confirmed (the sanctity) of marriage, by first forbidding its dissolution; and, if separation had taken place, by wishing the nuptial bond to be resumed by reconciliation.
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.5, ch.7

{1 Cor 11:10; Gen 6:1-2}
Location 54479
He adds: "Because of the angels." What angels? In other words, whose angels? If he means the fallen angels of the Creator, there is great propriety in his meaning. It is right that that face which was a snare to them should wear some mark of a humble guise and obscured beauty.
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.5, ch.8

{Isa 11:1-2}
Location 54488
prophecy of Isaiah: "There shall come forth a rod out of the stem of Jesse, and a flower shall spring up from his root; and upon Him shall rest the Spirit of the Lord." After which he enumerates the special gifts of the same: "The spirit of wisdom and understanding, the spirit of counsel and might, the spirit of knowledge and of religion. And with the fear of the Lord shall the Spirit fill Him." In this figure of a flower he shows that Christ was to arise out of the rod which sprang from the stem of Jesse; in other words, from the virgin of the race of David, the son of Jesse. In this Christ the whole substantia of the Spirit would have to rest, not meaning that it would be as it were some subsequent acquisition accruing to Him who was always, even before His incarnation, the Spirit of God;
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.5, ch.8
{Isa 11:1-2; Lk 3:23}
In this figure of a flower he shows that Christ was to arise out of the rod which sprang from the stem of Jesse; in other words, from the virgin of the race of David, the son of Jesse.
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.5, ch.8

{Isa 3:2-3; Lk 16:16; 1 Cor 12:4-11; Eph 4:8; Ps 68:18; 1 Cor 4:15; Gal 4:19}
Location 54497
for after this time the Spirit of the Creator never breathed amongst them. From Judah were taken away "the wise man, and the cunning artificer, and the counsellor, and the prophet;" that so it might prove true that "the Law and the prophets were until John." Now hear how he declared that by Christ Himself, when returned to heaven, these spiritual gifts were to be sent: "He ascended up on high," that is, into heaven; "He led captivity captive," meaning death or slavery of man; "He gave gifts to the sons of men," that is, the gratuities, which we call charismata. He says specifically "sons of men," and not men promiscuously; thus exhibiting to us those who were the children of men truly so called, choice men, apostles. "For," says he, "I have begotten you through the gospel;" and "Ye are my children, of whom I travail again in birth."
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.5, ch.8

{1 Cor 12:8-11; Isa 11:1-3}
Location 54508
Now compare the Spirit's specific graces, as they are described by the apostle, and promised by the prophet Isaiah. "To one is given," says he, "by the Spirit the word of wisdom;" this we see at once is what Isaiah declared to be "the spirit of wisdom." "To another, the word of knowledge;" this will be "the (prophet's) spirit of understanding and counsel." "To another, faith by the same Spirit;" this will be "the spirit of religion and the fear of the Lord." "To another, the gifts of healing, and to another the working of miracles;" this will be "the spirit of might." "To another prophecy, to another discerning of spirits, to another divers kinds of tongues, to another the interpretation of tongues;" this will be "the spirit of knowledge." See how the apostle agrees with the prophet both in making the distribution of the one Spirit, and in interpreting His special graces [gifts].
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.5, ch.8

{1 Cor 14:34-35; 1 Cor 11:5-6; 1 Tim 2:11}
Location 54521
In precisely the same manner, when enjoining on women silence in the church, that they speak not for the mere sake of learning (although that even they have the right of prophesying, he has already shown when he covers the woman that prophesies with a veil), he goes to the Law for his sanction that woman should be under obedience.
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.5, ch.8

{Deut 18:22; 1 Cor 14:24-25; Prophet, Definition}
Location 54527
Let Marcion then exhibit, as gifts of his god, some prophets, such as have not spoken by human sense, but with the Spirit of God, such as have both predicted things to come, and have made manifest the secrets of the heart;
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.5, ch.8

{1 Cor 15:12}
Location 54551
But "to rise again" is predicable only of that which has fallen down; because it is by rising again, in consequence of its having fallen down, that it is said to have re-risen. For the syllable RE always implies iteration (or happening again).
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.5, ch.9

{Ps 110:1-7; Ps 8:6; 2 Kings 19:14; New Testament Scriptures; Lk 2:7; Lk 2:8-9; Unbelieving Jews}
Location 54563
following promise to Christ: "Sit Thou at my right hand, until I make Thine enemies Thy footstool. The rod of Thy strength shall the Lord send forth from Sion, and He shall rule along with Thee in the midst of Thine enemies." It is necessary for me to lay claim to those Scriptures which the Jews endeavour to deprive us of, and to show that they sustain my view. Now they say that this Psalm was a chant in honour of Hezekiah, because "he went up to the house of the Lord," and God turned back and removed his enemies. Therefore, (as they further hold,) those other words, "Before the morning star did I beget thee from the womb," are applicable to Hezekiah, and to the birth of Hezekiah. We on our side have published Gospels (to the credibility of which we have to thank them for having given some confirmation, indeed, already in so great a subject ); and these declare that the Lord was born at night, that so it might be "before the morning star," as is evident both from the star especially, and from the testimony of the angel, who at night announced to the shepherds that Christ had at that moment been born, and again from the place of the birth, for it is towards night that persons arrive at the (eastern) "inn." Perhaps, too, there was a mystic purpose in Christ's being born at night, destined, as He was, to be the light of the truth amidst the dark shadows of ignorance.
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.5, ch.9

{Isa 1:2; Ps 110:4; Heb 7:15-17}
Location 54575
especial care understood of Christ? "I have begotten Thee from the womb," that is to say, from a womb only, without a man's seed, making it a condition of a fleshly body that it should come out of a womb. What is here added (in the Psalm), "Thou art a priest forever," relates to (Christ) Himself. Hezekiah was no priest; and even if he had been one, he would not have been a priest forever. "After the order," says He, "of Melchizedek." Now what had Hezekiah to do with Melchizedek, the priest of the most high God, and him uncircumcised too, who blessed the circumcised Abraham, after receiving from him the offering of tithes? To Christ, however, "the order of Melchizedek" will be very suitable; for Christ is the proper and legitimate High Priest of God. He is the Pontiff of the priesthood of the uncircumcision, constituted such, even then, for the Gentiles,
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.5, ch.9

{Ps 72:6; Jn 1:14}
Location 54586
"He shall come down," says He, "like rain upon a fleece, and like dropping showers upon the earth," describing His descent from heaven to the flesh as gentle and unobserved.
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.5, ch.9

{Ps 70:8; 1 Cor 15:24-28; Rev 11:15}
Location 54588
"He shall have dominion," says the Psalmist, "from sea to sea, and from the river unto the ends of the earth." To Christ alone was this given; whilst Solomon reigned over only the moderately-sized kingdom of Judah.
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.5, ch.9

{1 Cor 15:12-19; Marcion}
Location 54615
For Marcion does not in any wise admit the resurrection of the flesh, and it is only the salvation of the soul which he promises;
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.5, ch.10

{1 Cor 15:50; Gal 5:19-21; Gal 6:8}
Location 54654
For what are this next words? "Now this I say, brethren, that flesh and blood cannot inherit the kingdom of God." He means the works of the flesh and blood, which, in his Epistle to the Galatians, deprive men of the kingdom of God.
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.5, ch.10

{Rom 8:8; Gal 5:19-21; Gal 6:8}
Location 54656
In other passages also he is accustomed to put the natural condition instead of the works that are done therein, as when he says, that "they who are in the flesh cannot please God." Now, when shall we be able to please God except whilst we are in this flesh? There is, I imagine, no other time wherein a man can work. If, however, whilst we are even naturally living in the flesh, we yet eschew the deeds of the flesh, then we shall not be in the flesh;
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.5, ch.10

{1 Cor 15:50; Gal 5:19-21; Gal 6:8}
Location 54660
Now, since in the word flesh we are enjoined to put off, not the substance, but the works of the flesh, therefore in the use of the same word the kingdom of God is denied to the works of the flesh, not to the substance thereof. For not that is condemned in which evil is done, but only the evil which is done in it.
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.5, ch.10

{Joel 2:28; 2 Cor 3:6; Deut 32:39; 2 Cor 3:15; 2 Cor 3:18}
Location 54699
Indeed, He who had engraved its letter in stones is the same as He who had said of its spirit, "I will pour out of my Spirit upon all flesh." Even if "the letter killeth, yet the Spirit giveth life;" and both belong to Him who says: "I kill, and I make alive; I wound, and I heal." We have already made good the Creator's claim to this twofold character of judgment and goodness-" killing in the letter" through the Law, and "quickening in the Spirit" through the Gospel. ... Of Israel he says, "Even unto this day the same veil is upon their heart;" showing that the veil which was on the face of Moses was a figure of the veil which is on the heart of the nation still; ... thereupon the revelation and the glory of the Spirit in the person of Christ-" even as," to use his words, "by the Spirit of the Lord"- he testifies that the whole Mosaic system was a figure of Christ, of whom the Jews indeed were ignorant, but who is known to us Christians. 

{2 Cor 4:4; Isa 14:14; Marcion}
We are quite aware that some passages are open to ambiguity, from the way in which they are read, or else from their punctuation, when there is room for these two causes of ambiguity. The latter method has been adopted by Marcion, by reading the passage which follows, "in whom the God of this world," as if it described the Creator as the God of this world. ... We, however, say that the passage ought to be punctuated with a comma after God, to this effect: "In whom God hath blinded the eyes of the unbelievers of this world." "In whom" means the Jewish unbelievers. ... At any rate, if there is a God of this world, He blinds the heart of the unbelievers of this world, because they have not of their own accord recognised His Christ, who ought to be understood from His Scriptures. ... A simpler answer I shall find ready to hand in interpreting "the god of this world" of the devil, who once said, as the prophet describes him: "I will be like the Most High; I will exalt my throne in the clouds."
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.5, ch.11

{Eph 2:12; Introduction to Ephesians}
Location 54745
I here pass over discussion about another epistle, which we hold to have been written to the Ephesians, but the heretics to the Laodiceans. In it he tells them to remember, that at the time when they were Gentiles they were without Christ, aliens from (the commonwealth of) Israel, without intercourse, without the covenants and any hope of promise,
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.5, ch.11

{2 Cor 4:16}
Location 54764
Now, when he adds of "the inward man" also, that it "is renewed day by day," he demonstrates both issues here- the wasting away of the body by the wear and tear of its trials, and the renewal of the soul by its contemplation of the promises.
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.5, ch.11

{2 Cor 5:2-3; 1 Cor 15:42-43}
Location 54773
when he adds, that "in this tabernacle of our earthly body we do groan, earnestly desiring to be clothed upon with the vesture which is from heaven, if so be, that having been unclothed, we shall not be found naked;" in other words, shall regain that of which we have been divested, even our body.
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.5, ch.12

{2 Cor 5:4; 1 Cor 15:51-53; 1 Thess 4:13-17; 2 Thess 2:3-8; Rev 7:14}
Location 54779
and these also shall, in the crisis of the last moment, and from their instantaneous death, whilst encountering the oppressions of antichrist, undergo a change, obtaining therein not so much a divestiture of body as "a clothing upon" with the vesture which is from heaven. So that whilst these shall put on over their (changed) body this, heavenly raiment, the dead also shall for their part recover their body, over which they too have a supervesture to put on, even the incorruption of heaven;
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.5, ch.12

{2 Cor 5:4}
Location 54785
"not wishing indeed to be unclothed," but (rather as wanting) "to be clothed upon;" in other words, as wishing not to undergo death, but to be surprised into life, "that this moral (body) might be swallowed up of life," by being rescued from death in the supervesture of its changed state.
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.5, ch.12

{2 Cor 5:4-5}
Location 54787
and tells us that we even hold of God "the earnest of His Spirit" (pledged as it were thereby to have "the clothing upon," which is the object of our hope),
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.5, ch.12

{2 Cor 5:17; Isa 43:19}
Location 54795
"If therefore any man be in Christ, he is a new creature; old things are passed away; behold, all things are become new;" and so is accomplished the prophecy of Isaiah.
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.5, ch.12

{Lk 23:43; 2 Cor 12:4; Rev 2:7}
Location 54804
On Paradise is the title of a treatise of ours, in which is discussed all that the subject admits of*.
*NOTE: Patitur. The work here referred to is not extant; it is, however, referred to in the De Anima,
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.5, ch.12

{Rom 1:17; Rom 3:21-26}
Location 54826
revealed from faith to faith," ... It is He who removes (men) from confidence in the Law to faith in the gospel- that is to say, His own law and His own gospel.
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.5, ch.13

{Rev 22:19; Marcion; New Testament Scriptures}
Location 54833
But what serious gaps Marcion has made in this epistle especially, by withdrawing whole passages at his will, will be clear from the unmutilated text of our own copy.
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.5, ch.13

{Rom 2:29; Jer 4:4; Deut 10:16 [LXX]; Rom 2:28; Rom 7:6; 2 Cor 3:6}
Location 54851
Now it is quite within the purpose of the God of the Law that circumcision should be that of the heart, not in the flesh; in the spirit, and not in the letter. Since this is the circumcision recommended by Jeremiah: "Circumcise (yourselves to the Lord, and take away) the foreskins of your heart;" and even of Moses: "Circumcise, therefore, the hardness of your heart,"- the Spirit which circumcises the heart will proceed from Him who prescribed the letter also which clips the flesh; and "the Jew which is one inwardly" will be a subject of the self-same God as he also is who is "a Jew outwardly;" because the apostle would have preferred not to have mentioned a Jew at all, unless he were a servant of the God of the Jews.
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.5, ch.13

{Rom 7:8}
Location 54874
I, however, have no acquaintance with sin except through the Law. But how high an encomium of the Law (do we obtain) from this fact, that by it there comes to light the latent presence of sin! It was not the Law, therefore, which led me astray, but "sin, taking occasion by the commandment."
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.5, ch.13

{Rom 7:13; Marcion}
Location 54878
Who can draw a distinction, and say that there are two gods, one just and the other good, when He ought to be believed to be both one and the other, whose commandment is both "just and good?"
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.5, ch.13

{Rom 7:14; Rom 7:6; 2 Cor 3:6}
Location 54879
Then, again, when affirming the Law to be "spiritual" he thereby implies that it is prophetic, and that it is figurative.
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.5, ch.13

{Rom 8:3}
Location 54888
On this account, therefore, (does he mean to say that) the Son was sent in the likeness of sinful flesh, that He might redeem this sinful flesh by a like substance, even a fleshly one, which bare a resemblance to sinful flesh, although it was itself free from sin.
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.5, ch.14

{Isa 29:13 [LXX]; Ps 2:2; Rom 10:3; Mt 15:9}
Location 54921
and as to their preferring the establishment of their own righteousness, (the Creator again describes them as) "teaching for doctrines the commandments of men;" moreover, as "having gathered themselves together against the Lord and against His Christ"- from ignorance of Him, of course.
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.5, ch.14

{Isa 45:3; Isa 40:13; Rom 11:34-35}
Location 54930
promised: "I will give to them treasures which have been hidden, and which men have not seen will I open to them." Hence, then, came the exclamation, "O the depth of the riches and the wisdom of God!" For His treasures were now opening out. This is the purport of what Isaiah said, and of (the apostle's own) subsequent quotation of the self-same passage, of the prophet: "Who hath known the mind of the Lord? or who hath been His counsellor? Who hath first given to Him, and it shall be recompensed to him again?"
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.5, ch.14

{Rom 12:17; Lev 19:17-18; Rom 12:19; Deut 32:25; Rom 12:18; Rom 13:9}
Location 54941
For against such a disposition Isaiah pronounces a woe. "Recompense to no man evil for evil." (Like unto which is the Creator's precept:) "Thou shalt not remember thy brother's evil against thee." (Again:) "Avenge not yourselves;" for it is written, "Vengeance is mine, I will repay, saith the Lord." "Live peaceably with all men." The retaliation of the Law, therefore, permitted not retribution for an injury; it rather repressed any attempt thereat by the fear of a recompense. Very properly, then, did he sum up the entire teaching of the Creator in this precept of His: "Thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself."
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.5, ch.14

{1 Thess 4:3-4; 1 Cor. 7:32-35}
Location 54972
This passage (of the apostle) I would treat in such a way as to maintain the superiority of the other and higher sanctity, preferring continence and virginity to marriage, but by no means prohibiting the latter.
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.5, ch.15

{1 Thess 4:15-17; Gal 4:26; Isa 60:8; Acts 1:9}
Location 54974
He says that those who "remain unto the coming of Christ," along with "the dead in Christ, shall rise first," being "caught up in the clouds to meet the Lord in the air." I find it was in their foresight of all this, that the heavenly intelligences gazed with admiration on "the Jerusalem which is above," and by the mouth of Isaiah said long ago: "Who are these that fly as clouds, and as doves with their young ones, unto me?" Now, as Christ has prepared for us this ascension
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.5, ch.15

{Am 9:6; Acts 1:9}
Location 54978
He must be the Christ of whom Amos spoke: "It is He who builds His ascent up to the heavens," even for Himself and His people.
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.5, ch.15

{2 Thess 2:3-4; 1 Jn 4:1-3; 2 Jn 7-11}
Location 55015
Well, but who is the man of sin, the son of perdition," who must first be revealed before the Lord comes; "who opposeth and exalteth himself above all that is called God, or that is worshipped; who is to sit in the temple of God, and boast himself as being God?" According indeed to our view, he is Antichrist; as it is taught us in both the ancient and the new prophecies, and especially by the Apostle John, who says that "already many false prophets are gone out into the world," the fore-runners of Antichrist, who deny that Christ is come in the flesh, and do not acknowledge Jesus (to be the Christ), meaning in God the Creator.
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.5, ch.16

{Marcion; Introduction to Ephesians}
Location 55044
We have it on the true tradition of the Church, that this epistle was sent to the Ephesians, not to the Laodiceans. Marcion, however, was very desirous of giving it the new title (of Laodicean),
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.5, ch.17

{Eph 1:9-10}
Location 55048
"that good pleasure, which God hath purposed in the mystery of His will, that in the dispensation of the fulness of times He might recapitulate" (if I may so say, according to the exact meaning of the Greek word ) "all things in Christ, both which are in heaven and which are on earth,"
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.5, ch.17

{Joel 2:28}
Location 55064
That which was made through Joel: "In the last days will I pour out of my Spirit upon all flesh," that is, on all nations.
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.5, ch.17

{Eph 2:2}
Location 55076
to the course of this world, according to the prince of the power of the air, who worketh in the children of disobedience." ... He, moreover, who is the Prince of the power of the ages must not be thought to be called the prince of the power of the air; for He who is chief over the higher powers derives no title from the lower powers, although these, too, may be ascribed to Him.
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.5, ch.17

{Eph 2:10}
Location 55096
He therefore who made man (at first), created him also in Christ. As touching the substance of nature, He "made" him; as touching the work of grace, He "created" him.
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.5, ch.17

{Isa 46:12-13}
Location 55106
The apostle had in mind that it had been predicted concerning the call of the Gentiles from their distant alienation in words like these: "They who were far off from me have come to my righteousness."
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.5, ch.17

{Ex 20:14; Mt 5:27-28; Eph 2:10; Eph 2:15-16; Ex 20:13; Mt 5:21-22}
Location 55113
Since, however, He has made the Law obsolete by His own precepts, even by Himself fulfilling the Law (for superfluous is, "Thou shalt not commit adultery," when He says, "Thou shalt not look on a woman to lust after her;" superfluous also is, "Thou shalt do no murder," when He says, "Thou shalt not speak evil of thy neighbour,") it is impossible to make an adversary of the Law out of one who so completely promotes it. "For to create in Himself of twain," for He who had made is also the same who creates (just as we have found it stated above: "For we are His workmanship, created in Christ Jesus"), "one new man, making peace" (really new, and really man- no phantom- but new, and newly born of a virgin by the Spirit of God),
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.5, ch.17

{Ex 2:20; Ps 118:22; Mt 21:42; Lk 20:17; Acts 4:11}
Location 55125
For whence did he learn to call Christ "the chief corner-stone," but from the figure given him in the Psalm: "The stone which the builders rejected is become the head (stone) of the corner?"
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.5, ch.17

{Eph 5:18-19; Am 2;12; Lev 10:9; Isa 5:11-12}
Location 55161
(The apostle says further:) "Be not drunk with wine, wherein is excess,"- a precept which is suggested by the passage (of the prophet), where the seducers of the consecrated (Nazarites) to drunkenness are rebuked: "Ye gave wine to my holy ones to drink." This prohibition from drink was given also to the high priest Aaron and his sons, "when they went into the holy place." ... The command, to "sing to the Lord with psalms and hymns," comes suitably from him who knew that those who "drank wine with drums and psalteries" were blamed by God.
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.5, ch.18

{Eph 5:22-24}
Location 55166
But he declares that "wives ought to be in subjection to their husbands:" what reason does he give for this? "Because," says he, "the husband is the head of the wife."
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.5, ch.18

{Eph 5:25-32}
Location 55173
Church also, because it is loved by Christ on the same principle. Yea, Christ loved the flesh even as the Church. For no man will love the picture of his wife without taking care of it, and honouring it and crowning it. The likeness partakes with the reality in the privileged honour.
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.5, ch.18

{Eph 6:4; Ex 10:2}
Location 55184
Again, (the apostle writes:) "Parents, bring up your children in the fear and admonition of the Lord." For you have heard how it was said to them of old time: "Ye shall relate these things to your children; and your children in like manner to their children."
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.5, ch.18

{Eph 6:12; Gen 6:1-4}
Location 55198
But "the spiritual wickedness" did not signify the Creator, because of the apostle's additional description, "in heavenly places;" for the apostle was quite aware that "spiritual wickedness" had been at work in heavenly places, when angels were entrapped into sin by the daughters of men.
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.5, ch.18

{Col 1:5-6; Mt. 28:19}
Location 55209
he says: "For the hope which is laid up for you in heaven, whereof ye heard before in the word of the truth of the gospel; which is come unto you, as it is unto all the world." For if, even at that time, the tradition of the gospel had spread everywhere, how much more now! Now, if it is our gospel which has spread everywhere, rather than any heretical gospel,
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.5, ch.19

{Ps 19:4; Col 1:15; Apostolic Faith; 2 Tim 2:1-2}
Location 55212
should Marcion's gospel succeed in filling the whole world, it would not even in that case be entitled to the character of apostolic. For this quality, it will be evident, can only belong to that gospel which was the first to fill the world; in other words, to the gospel of that God who of old declared this of its promulgation: "Their sound is gone out through all the earth, and their words to the end of the world." He calls Christ "the image of the invisible God." We in like manner say that the Father of Christ is invisible, for we know that it was the Son who was seen in ancient times
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.5, ch.19

{Ps 19:4; Col 1:15; Ex 33:20; Jn 1:3; Jn 1:14}
Location 55217
He calls Christ "the image of the invisible God." We in like manner say that the Father of Christ is invisible, for we know that it was the Son who was seen in ancient times ... 
Because long before he wrote this we find a description of our God to this effect: "No man can see the Lord, and live." If Christ is not "the first-begotten before every creature," as that "Word of God by whom all things were made, and without whom nothing was made;" if "all things were" not "in Him created, whether in heaven or on earth, visible and invisible, whether they be thrones or dominions, or principalities, or powers;" if "all things were" not "created by Him and for Him" (for these truths Marcion ought not to allow concerning Him), then the apostle could not have so positively laid it down, that "He is before all." For how is He before all, if He is not before all things? How, again, is He before all things, if He is not "the first-born of every creature"- if He is not the Word of the Creator?
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.5, ch.19

{Col 1:15; Jn 1:1; Relationship of the Father and Son}
Location 55289
It is well for us that in another passage (the apostle) calls Christ "the image of the invisible God." For will it not follow with equal force from that passage, that Christ is not truly God, because the apostle places Him in the image of God, if, (as Marcion contends,) He is not truly man because of His having taken on Him the form or image of a man?
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.5, ch.20

{Phil 2:6-7; Jn 1:1; Relationship of the Father and Son}
Location 55293
But since he is truly God, as the Son of the Father, in His fashion and image, He has been already by the force of this conclusion determined to be truly man, as the Son of man, "found in the fashion" and image "of a man."
Tertullian, Against Marcion, bk.5, ch.20

{Acts 17:29-30; 1 Cor 8:5-6; 1 Cor 12:2}
Location 42734
your very gods themselves, your very temples and oracles, and sacred rites, are less ancient than the work of a single prophet, in whom you have the thesaurus of the entire Jewish religion, and therefore too of ours.
Tertullian, Apology, ch.19


{Rom 1:16; Acts 5:41}
Location 42771
But we are neither ashamed of Christ- for we rejoice to be counted His disciples, and in His name to suffer- nor do we differ from the Jews concerning God. We must make, therefore, a remark or two as to Christ's divinity.
Tertullian, Apology, ch.21

{Lk 3:8}
Location 42776
But how deeply they have sinned, puffed up to their fall with a false trust in their noble ancestors, turning from God's way into a way of sheer impiety, though they themselves should refuse to admit it, their present national ruin would afford sufficient proof. Scattered abroad, a race of wanderers, exiles from their own land and clime, they roam over the whole world without either a human or a heavenly king, not possessing even the stranger's right to set so much as a simple footstep in their native country.
Tertullian, Apology, ch.21

{Heb 11:3; Jn 1:1-3}
Location 42788
We have already asserted that God made the world, and all which it contains, by His Word, and Reason, and Power. It is abundantly plain that your philosophers, too, regard the Logos- that is, the Word and Reason- as the Creator of the universe. For Zeno lays it down that he is the creator, having made all things according to a determinate plan; that his name is Fate, and God,
Tertullian, Apology, ch.21

{Col 1:15; Jn 4:24; Jn 10:30; 1 Cor 11:3}
Location 42794
We have been taught that He proceeds forth from God, and in that procession He is generated; so that He is the Son of God, and is called God from unity of substance with God. For God, too, is a Spirit. Even when the ray is shot from the sun, it is still part of the parent mass; the sun will still be in the ray, because it is a ray of the sun- there is no division of substance, but merely an extension. Thus Christ is Spirit of Spirit, and God of God, as light of light is kindled. The material matrix remains entire and unimpaired, though you derive from it any number of shoots possessed of its qualities; so, too, that which has come forth out of God is at once God and the Son of God, and the two are one. In this way also, as He is Spirit of Spirit and God of God, He is made a second in manner of existence- in position, not in nature; and He did not withdraw from the original source, but went forth.
Tertullian, Apology, ch.21

{Lk 1:35}
Location 42800
This ray of God, then, as it was always foretold in ancient times, descending into a certain virgin, and made flesh in her womb, is in His birth God and man united.
Tertullian, Apology, ch.21

{Dan 7:13; Jer 23:5; Isa 6-7}
Location 42803
The Jews, too, were well aware that Christ was coming, as those to whom the prophets spake. Nay, even now His advent is expected by them; nor is there any other contention between them and us, than that they believe the advent has not yet occurred.
Tertullian, Apology, ch.21

{Isa 53:2-3; Phil 2:6-8; 2 Thess 1:7-10; Rev 1:7}
Location 42805
For two comings of Christ having been revealed to us: a first, which has been fulfilled in the lowliness of a human lot; a second, which impends over the world, now near its close, in all the majesty of Deity unveiled; and, by misunderstanding the first, they have concluded that the second- which, as matter of more manifest prediction, they set their hopes on- is the only one.
Tertullian, Apology, ch.21

{Jn 1:1-3; Rom 1:4}
Location 42813
proving that He was the Logos of God, that primordial first-begotten Word, accompanied by power and reason, and based on Spirit,- that
Tertullian, Apology, ch.21

{Mt 27:45; Mk 15:33; Lk 23:44-45}
Location 42819
At His own free-will, He with a word dismissed from Him His spirit, anticipating the executioner's work. In the same hour, too, the light of day was withdrawn, when the sun at the very time was in his meridian
Tertullian, Apology, ch.21

{Jn 13:1; Jn 7:4-10}
Location 42827
For the Lord, you see, did not go forth into the public gaze, lest the wicked should be delivered from their error; that faith also, destined to a great reward, might hold its ground in difficulty. But He spent forty days with some of His disciples down in Galilee, a region of Judea, instructing them in the doctrines they were to teach to others.
Tertullian, Apology, ch.21

{Jn 18:36; Jn 6:15; Mt 10:18}
Location 42830
All these things Pilate did to Christ; and now in fact a Christian in his own convictions, he sent word of Him to the reigning Caesar, who was at the time Tiberius. Yes, and the Caesars too would have believed on Christ, if either the Caesars had not been necessary for the world, or if Christians could have been Caesars.
Tertullian, Apology, ch.21

{Rev 12:11; Rev 2:10; Jn 1:17}
Location 42840
We say, and before all men we say, and torn and bleeding under your tortures, we cry out, "We worship God through Christ." Count Christ a man, if you please; by Him and in Him God would be known and be adored. If the Jews object, we answer that Moses, who was but a man, taught them their religion;
Tertullian, Apology, ch.21

{Heb 1:3; Jn 1:1-2}
Location 42844
Surely Christ, then, had a right to reveal Deity, which was in fact His own essential possession,
Tertullian, Apology, ch.21

{Greek Philosophy}
Location 42851
The philosophers acknowledge there are demons; Socrates himself waiting on a demon's will.
Tertullian, Apology, ch.22

{Rom 1:18-21; Titus 3:3}
Location 42853
even the ignorant common people make frequent use of them in cursing. In fact, they call upon Satan, the demon-chief, in their execrations, as though from some instinctive soul-knowledge of him.
Tertullian, Apology, ch.22

{Gen 6:1-4; Isa 14:12; Jude 6}
Location 42856
We are instructed, moreover, by our sacred books how from certain angels, who fell of their own free-will, there sprang a more wicked demon-brood, condemned of God along with the authors of their race,
Tertullian, Apology, ch.22


{Meaning of Godhead}
Location 42888
giving as they do the very proofs which raise your gods to godhead,
Tertullian, Apology, ch.23

{Mt 10:18; Mk 5:9}
Location 42893
Let a person be brought before your tribunals, who is plainly under demoniacal possession. The wicked spirit, bidden to speak by a follower of Christ, will as readily make the truthful confession that he is a demon, as elsewhere he has falsely asserted that he is a god.
Tertullian, Apology, ch.23

{Lk 10:17; Rom 16:20}
Location 42902
If, on the one hand, they are really gods, why do they pretend to be demons? Is it from fear of us? In that case your divinity is put in subjection to Christians; and you surely can never ascribe deity to that which is under authority of man,
Tertullian, Apology, ch.23

{Rev 20:11-15}
Location 42916
Mock as you like, but get the demons if you can to join you in your mocking; let them deny that Christ is coming to judge every human soul which has existed from the world's beginning, clothing it again with the body it laid aside at death;
Tertullian, Apology, ch.23

{Jn 8:44}
Location 42925
You believe them when they lie; give credit to them, then, when they speak the truth about themselves. No one plays the liar to bring disgrace upon his own head,
Tertullian, Apology, ch.23

{Acts 17:16, 29-30}
Location 42949
Every province even, and every city, has its god. Syria has Astarte, Arabia has Dusares, the Norici have Belenus, Africa has its Caelestis, Mauritania has its own princes.
Tertullian, Apology, ch.24

{Rom 1:21-25}
Location 42955
But with you liberty is given to worship any god but the true God, as though He were not rather the God all should worship, to whom all belong.
Tertullian, Apology, ch.24

{1 Cor 8:4; Deut 4:35,39; Deut 6:4}
Location 42959
I shall not avoid the controversy which is invited by the groundless assertion of those who maintain that, as a reward of their singular homage to religion, the Romans have been raised to such heights of power as to have become masters of the world;
Tertullian, Apology, ch.25

{Meaning of Godhead}
Location 42981
who did not yet bow down to them, as not yet raised to godhead.
Tertullian, Apology, ch.25

{Roman empire; Mk 10:42}
Location 42988
The Romans, therefore, were not distinguished for their devotion to the gods before they attained to greatness; and so their greatness was not the result of their religion. Indeed, how could religion make a people great who have owed their greatness to their irreligion? For, if I am not mistaken, kingdoms and empires are acquired by wars, and are extended by victories. More than that, you cannot have wars and victories without the taking, and often the destruction, of cities. That is a thing in which the gods have their share of calamity. Houses and temples suffer alike; there is indiscriminate slaughter of priests and citizens; the hand of rapine is laid equally upon sacred and on common treasure. Thus the sacrileges of the Romans are as numerous as their trophies.
Tertullian, Apology, ch.25

{Roman empire}
Location 42998
Those, too, whose kingdoms have become part of the one great whole of the Roman empire, were not without religion when their kingdoms were taken from them.
Tertullian, Apology, ch.25

{Roman empire}
Location 43003
Why, the Rome of rural simplicity is older than some of her gods; she reigned before her proud, vast Capitol was built. The Babylonians exercised dominion, too, before the days of the Pontiffs;
Tertullian, Apology, ch.26

{Roman empire; Mt 27:11-26; Introduction to 1 Macc}
Location 43006
Judea, whose God you Romans once honored with victims, and its temple with gifts, and its people with treaties;
Tertullian, Apology, ch.26

{Roman empire; Mt 5:33-37; Oaths; Emperor worship}
Location 43036
Then, too, among you, people far more readily swear a false oath in the name of all the gods, than in the name of the single genius of Caesar.
Tertullian, Apology, ch.28

{1 Tim 2:1-2}
Location 43050
For we offer prayer for the safety of our princes to the eternal, the true, the living God,
Tertullian, Apology, ch.30

{1 Tim 2:8; 1 Cor 11:4,7}
Location 43058
Thither we lift our eyes, with hands outstretched, because free from sin; with head uncovered, for we have nothing whereof to be ashamed;
Tertullian, Apology, ch.30

{1 Tim 2:1-2}
Location 43059
Without ceasing, for all our emperors we offer prayer.
Tertullian, Apology, ch.30

{1 Tim 2:1-2}
Location 43059
We pray for life prolonged; for security to the empire; for protection to the imperial house; for brave armies, a faithful senate, a virtuous people, the world at rest, whatever, as man or Caesar, an emperor would wish. These things I cannot ask from any but the God from whom I know I shall obtain them,
Tertullian, Apology, ch.30

{Mal 1:6-8; Zeph 3:4}
Location 43065
one wonders, when your victims are examined by these vile priests, why the examination is not rather of the sacrificers than the sacrifices.
Tertullian, Apology, ch.30

{Mt 10:22; Mt 24:9; Heb 11:35-38}
Location 43066
With our hands thus stretched out and up to God, rend us with your iron claws, hang us up on crosses, wrap us in flames, take our heads from us with the sword, let loose the wild beasts on us,- the very attitude of a Christian praying is one of preparation for all punishment.
Tertullian, Apology, ch.30

{Mt 5:44; 1 Pet 3:9}
Location 43072
examine our sacred books, which we do not keep in hiding, and which many accidents put into the hands of those who are not of us. Learn from them that a large benevolence is enjoined upon us, even so far as to supplicate God for our enemies, and to beseech blessings on our persecutors.
Tertullian, Apology, ch.31

{2 Pet 3:9-12}
Location 43080
we know that a mighty shock impending over the whole earth- in fact, the very end of all things threatening dreadful woes- is only retarded by the continued existence of the Roman empire. We have no desire, then, to be overtaken by these dire events; and in praying that their coming may be delayed, we are lending our aid to Rome's duration.
Tertullian, Apology, ch.32

{Mt 5:33-37; 1 Cor 10:19-21; Demons}
Location 43082
though we decline to swear by the genii of the Caesars, we swear by their safety, which is worth far more than all your genii. Are you ignorant that these genii are called "Daemones," and thence the diminutive name "Daemonia" is applied to them? We
Tertullian, Apology, ch.32

{Mk 16:17; Lk 10:17; Demons}
Location 43086
as for demons, that is, your genii, we have been in the habit of exorcising them, not of swearing by them,
Tertullian, Apology, ch.32

{Dan 3:1-18; Ex 20:3-5; Rev 14:9-12; Rev 13:8,15; Emperor Worship}
Location 43093
Never will I call the emperor God, and that either because it is not in me to be guilty of falsehood; or that I dare not turn him into ridicule;
Tertullian, Apology, ch.33

{Lk 2:1}
Location 43100
Augustus, the founder of the empire, would not even have the title Lord; for that, too, is a name of Deity. For my part, I am willing to give the emperor this designation, but in the common acceptation of the word, and when I am not forced to call him Lord as in God's place.
Tertullian, Apology, ch.34

{Ex 20:3-5; 1 Pet 2:17}
Location 43117
For why do we keep the votive days and high rejoicings in honour of the Caesars with chastity, sobriety, and virtue? Why, on the day of gladness, do we neither cover our door-posts with laurels, nor intrude upon the day with lamps? It is a proper thing, at the call of a public festivity, to dress your house up like some new brothel.
Tertullian, Apology, ch.35

{Ex 20:3-5; Rev 14:9-12; Rev 13:8,15; Holidays}
Location 43120
we are accused of a lower sacrilege, because we do not celebrate along with you the holidays of the Caesars
Tertullian, Apology, ch.35

{Ex 20:3-5; Rev 14:9-12; Rev 13:8,15; Holidays}
Location 43126
they are shouting, "May Jupiter take years from us, and with them lengthen like to you,"- words as foreign to the lips of a Christian as
Tertullian, Apology, ch.35

{Persecution; Mt 10:22; Jn 15:18-25}
Location 43128
But this is the rabble, you say; yet, as the rabble, they still are Romans, and none more frequently than they demand the death of Christians.
Tertullian, Apology, ch.35

{Persecution; Mt 10:22}
Location 43133
Yet all of them, on the very eve of their traitorous outbreak, offered sacrifices for the safety of the emperor, and swore by his genius, one thing in profession, and another in the heart; and no doubt they were in the habit of calling Christians enemies of the state.
Tertullian, Apology, ch.35

{Rev 14:9-12; Rev 13:8,15; Rom 1:21-23}
Location 43136
with what verdant and branching laurels they clad their door-posts,
Tertullian, Apology, ch.35

{Deut 18:9-14}
Location 43139
those who consult astrologers, and soothsayers, and augurs, and magicians, about the life of the Caesars,- arts which, as made known by the angels who sinned, and forbidden by God, Christians do not even make use of in their own affairs.
Tertullian, Apology, ch.35

{1 Pet 3:9-11; Rom 12:17-18}
Location 43150
God, who both requires and remunerates an impartial benevolence. We are the same to emperors as to our ordinary neighbors. For we are equally forbidden to wish ill, to do ill, to speak ill, to think ill of all men. The thing we must not do to an emperor, we must not do to any one else:
Tertullian, Apology, ch.36

{Persecution; Acts 7:57-58; Acts 21:30-36; Acts 17:5; Acts 14:5}
Location 43156
How often, too, the hostile mob, paying no regard to you, takes the law into its own hand, and assails us with stones and flames!
Tertullian, Apology, ch.37

{Persecution; 1 Pet 2:20-21; 1 Pet 3:9}
Location 43159
Yet, banded together as we are, ever so ready to sacrifice our lives, what single case of revenge for injury are you able to point to,
Tertullian, Apology, ch.37

{Col 1:6; 1 Thess 1:8; Acts 8:4-8; Acts 17:6}
Location 43164
We are but of yesterday, and we have filled every place among you- cities, islands, fortresses, towns, market-places, the very camp, tribes, companies, palace, senate, forum,- we have left nothing to you but the temples of your gods.
Tertullian, Apology, ch.37

{Mt 5:39; 1 Pet 2:23-24}
Location 43166
in our religion it were not counted better to be slain than to slay?
Tertullian, Apology, ch.37

{Phil 2:15-16; Mt 5:13}
Location 43168
if such multitudes of men were to break away from you, and betake themselves to some remote corner of the world, why, the very loss of so many citizens, whatever sort they were, would cover the empire with shame;
Tertullian, Apology, ch.37

{Mt 5:11-12; Col 1:6; 1 Thess 1:8}
Location 43171
For now it is the immense number of Christians which makes your enemies so few,- almost all the inhabitants of your various cities being followers of Christ. Yet you choose to call us enemies of the human race, rather than of human error.
Tertullian, Apology, ch.37

{Mk 16:17; Lk 10:17; Acts 8:7; Acts 16:18; Acts 19:12}
Location 43174
Who would save you, I mean, from the attacks of those spirits of evil, which without reward or hire we exorcise?
Tertullian, Apology, ch.37

{1 Cor 14:33}
Location 43180
unless I mistake the matter, the prevention of such associations is based on a prudential regard to public order, that the state may not be divided into parties, which would naturally lead to disturbance in the electoral assemblies, the councils, the curiae, the special conventions, even in the public shows by the hostile collisions of rival parties;
Tertullian, Apology, ch.38

{1 Pet 3:3-4}
Location 43188
Why do you take offence at us because we differ from you in regard to your pleasures? If we will not partake of your enjoyments, the loss is ours,
Tertullian, Apology, ch.38

 {Rom 14:17; Rom 13:12-13}
Location 43189
We reject what pleases you. You, on the other hand, have no taste for what is our delight.
Tertullian, Apology, ch.38

{Acts 4:24-31; Acts 1:14; Phil 4:6; Heb 10:25}
Location 43194
We meet together as an assembly and congregation, that, offering up prayer to God as with united force, we may wrestle with Him in our supplications. This violence God delights in.
Tertullian, Apology, ch.39

{1 Tim 2:1}
Location 43195
We pray, too, for the emperors, for their ministers and for all in authority, for the welfare of the world, for the prevalence of peace, for the delay of the final consummation.
Tertullian, Apology, ch.39

{Acts 17:11}
Location 43197
We assemble to read our sacred writings, if any peculiarity of the times makes either forewarning or reminiscence needful.
Tertullian, Apology, ch.39

{1 Cor 5:9-13; 1 Cor 5:1-5}
Location 43200
you have the most notable example of judgment to come when any one has sinned so grievously as to require his severance from us in prayer, in the congregation and in all sacred intercourse.
Tertullian, Apology, ch.39

{1 Tim 3:1-7}
Location 43202
The tried men of our elders preside over us, obtaining that honour not by purchase, but by established character.
Tertullian, Apology, ch.39

{2 Cor 8:1-15; 2 Cor 9:1-15; Jas 1:27}
Location 43205
These gifts are, as it were, piety's deposit fund. For they are not taken thence and spent on feasts, and drinking-bouts, and eating-houses, but to support and bury poor people, to supply the wants of boys and girls destitute of means and parents, and of old persons confined now to the house; such, too, as have suffered shipwreck; and if there happen to be any in the mines, or banished to the islands, or shut up in the prisons, for nothing but their fidelity to the cause of God's Church, they become the nurslings of their confession.
Tertullian, Apology, ch.39

{1 Jn 4:11-12; 1 Jn 3:16-18; 1 Pet 4:8}
Location 43210
And they are angry with us, too, because we call each other brethren;
Tertullian, Apology, ch.39

{Acts 4:34-35; 1 Jn 3:16-18; 1 Pet 4:8}
Location 43215
the family possessions, which generally destroy brotherhood among you, create fraternal bonds among us.
Tertullian, Apology, ch.39

{Acts 4:34-35; Acts 2:44-45; 1 Jn 3:16-18}
Location 43216
One in mind and soul, we do not hesitate to share our earthly goods with one another. All things are common among us but our wives.
Tertullian, Apology, ch.39

{1 Cor 15:32; Isa 22:13}
Location 43223
the saying of Diogenes: "The people of Megara feast as though they were going to die on the morrow; they build as though they were never to die!"
Tertullian, Apology, ch.39

{Agape; Jude 12; 1 Cor 11:20}
Location 43228
Our feast explains itself by its name. The Greeks call it agape, i.e., affection. Whatever it costs, our outlay in the name of piety is gain, since with the good things of the feast we benefit the needy;
Tertullian, Apology, ch.39

{Agape; Eph 5:19; Col 3:16; Heb 13:15}
Location 43232
The participants, before reclining, taste first of prayer to God. As much is eaten as satisfies the cravings of hunger; as much is drunk as befits the chaste. They say it is enough, as those who remember that even during the night they have to worship God; they talk as those who know that the Lord is one of their auditors. After manual ablution, and the bringing in of lights, each is asked to stand forth and sing, as he can, a hymn to God, either one from the holy Scriptures or one of his own composing,- a proof of the measure of our drinking. As the feast commenced with prayer, so with prayer it is closed.
Tertullian, Apology, ch.39

{1 Thess 5:15; 1 Pet 3:9; Heb 12:14}
Location 43240
we are as a community what we are individuals; we injure nobody, we trouble nobody.
Tertullian, Apology, ch.39

{Persecution; Jn 15:18-25}
Location 43245
If the Tiber rises as high as the city walls, if the Nile does not send its waters up over the fields, if the heavens give no rain, if there is an earthquake, if there is famine or pestilence, straightway the cry is, "Away with the Christians to the lion!"
Tertullian, Apology, ch.40

{Persecution; Jn 15:18-25}
Location 43247
Pray, tell me how many calamities befell the world and particular cities before Tiberius reigned- before the coming, that is, of Christ?
Tertullian, Apology, ch.40

{Mt 10:22; 2 Cor 6:3-10; Titus 2:12-14}
Location 43273
We, dried up with fastings, and our passions bound tightly up, holding back as long as possible from all the ordinary enjoyments of life, rolling in sackcloth and ashes, assail heaven with our importunities- touch God's heart- and when we have extorted divine compassion, why, Jupiter gets all the honour!
Tertullian, Apology, ch.40

{Mt 13:24-30; 2 Thess 1:7-9}
Location 43279
But this, you say, hits your God as well, since He permits His worshippers to suffer on account of those who dishonour Him. But admit first of all His providential arrangings, and you will not make this retort. For He who once for all appointed an eternal judgment at the world's close, does not precipitate the separation, which is essential to judgment, before the end. Meanwhile He deals with all sorts of men alike, so that all together share His favours and reproofs. His will is, that outcasts and elect should have adversities and prosperities in common, that we should have all the same experience
Tertullian, Apology, ch.41

{1 Cor 4:11-13}
Location 43292
are accused of being useless in the affairs of life. How in all the world can that be the case with people who are living among you, eating the same food, wearing the same attire, having the same habits, under the same necessities of existence?
Tertullian, Apology, ch.42

{1 Pet 2:12; Phil 2:15-16}
Location 43296
So we sojourn with you in the world, abjuring neither forum, nor shambles, nor bath, nor booth, nor workshop, nor inn, nor weekly market, nor any other places of commerce. We sail with you, and fight with you, and till the ground with you;
Tertullian, Apology, ch.42

{Rom 13:12-13}
Location 43301
yet I bathe at a decent and healthful hour,
Tertullian, Apology, ch.42

{Wreaths}
Location 43303
I do not buy a crown for my head. What matters it to you how I use them, if nevertheless the flowers are purchased? I think it more agreeable to have them free and loose, waving all about.
Tertullian, Apology, ch.42

{Eph 4:17-24; Rom 13:12-13; Eph 5:8-16}
Location 43305
We do not go to your spectacles; yet the articles that are sold there, if I need them, I will obtain more readily at their proper places.
Tertullian, Apology, ch.42

{Incense}
Location 43306
We certainly buy no frankincense. If the Arabias complain of this, let the Sabaeans be well assured that their more precious and costly merchandise is expended as largely in the burying of Christians as in the fumigating of the gods.
Tertullian, Apology, ch.42

{Pagan religion; Alms}
Location 43308
At any rate, you say, the temple revenues are every day falling off: how few now throw in a contribution! In truth, we are not able to give alms both to your human and your heavenly mendicants;
Tertullian, Apology, ch.42

{Rom 13:6-7}
Location 43310
our compassion spends more in the streets than yours does in the temples. But your other taxes will acknowledge a debt of gratitude to Christians; for in the faithfulness which keeps us from fraud upon a brother, we make conscience of paying all their dues:
Tertullian, Apology, ch.42

{Persecution; Jn 15:19}
Location 43352
These are the very things, it says, the philosophers counsel and profess- innocence, justice, patience, sobriety, chastity. Why, then, are we not permitted an equal liberty and impunity for our doctrines as they have, with whom, in respect of what we teach, we are compared? or why are not they, as so like us, not pressed to the same offices, for declining which our lives are imperilled?
Tertullian, Apology, ch.46

{Mt 5:33-37}
Location 43354
For who compels a philosopher to sacrifice or take an oath, or put out useless lamps at midday?
Tertullian, Apology, ch.46

{Greek philosophy}
Location 43357
This name of philosopher has no power to put demons to the rout. Why are they not able to do that too? since philosophers count demons inferior to gods. Socrates used to say, "If the demon grant permission."
Tertullian, Apology, ch.46

{Greek philosophy}
Location 43369
I turn to a part of the sentence passed by the Athenians against Socrates, who was pronounced a corrupter of youth. The Christian confines himself to the female sex.
Tertullian, Apology, ch.46

{Acts 16:25; 1 Thess 5:18; Eph 5:20; 1 Pet 4:12-14}
Location 43378
the Christian, even when he is condemned, gives thanks.
Tertullian, Apology, ch.46

{1 Pet 2:12; Phil 2:15-16; Mt 5:14-16}
Location 43379
the Christian is noted for his fidelity even among those who are not of his religion.
Tertullian, Apology, ch.46

{Mt 5:44; Lk 6:27-28; 1 Thess 5:15}
Location 43380
the Christian does no harm even to his foe.
Tertullian, Apology, ch.46

{Rom 13:1-5; Acts 8:1-4}
Location 43382
Hippias is put to death laying plots against the state: no Christian ever attempted such a thing in behalf of his brethren, even when persecution was scattering them abroad with every atrocity.
Tertullian, Apology, ch.46

{1 Cor 5:11-13}
Location 43383
But it will be said that some of us, too, depart from the rules of our discipline. In that case, however, we count them no longer Christians; but the philosophers who do such things retain still the name and the honour of wisdom.
Tertullian, Apology, ch.46

{Greek philosophy; 1 Cor 1:19-24; Col 2:8}
Location 43385
So, then, where is there any likeness Between the Christian and the philosopher? Between the disciple of Greece and of heaven? Between the man whose object is fame, and whose object is life? Between the talker and the doer? Between the man who builds up and the man who pulls down? Between the friend and the foe of error? Between one who corrupts the truth, and one who restores and teaches it?
Tertullian, Apology, ch.46

{Ps 117:2; Ps 119:160}
Location 43389
there is nothing so old as the truth;
Tertullian, Apology, ch.47

{Greek philosophy; Acts 17:18}
Location 43402
The Platonists, again, hold that He administers the affairs of the world; the Epicureans, on the contrary, that He is idle and inactive, and, so to speak, a nobody in human things.
Tertullian, Apology, ch.47

{1 Thess 5:23}
Location 43406
So again it is debated concerning the nature of the soul, which some contend is divine and eternal, while others hold that it is dissoluble.
Tertullian, Apology, ch.47

{2 Pet 3:3-12}
Location 43417
Accordingly, we get ourselves laughed at for proclaiming that God will one day judge the world.
Tertullian, Apology, ch.47

{2 Pet 3:3-12}
Location 43418
And if we threaten Gehenna, which is a reservoir of secret fire under the earth for purposes of punishment, we have in the same way derision heaped on us.
Tertullian, Apology, ch.47

{Lk 23:43; 2 Cor 12:4; Rev 2:7}
Location 43420
we speak of Paradise, the place of heavenly bliss appointed to receive the spirits of the saints, severed from the knowledge of this world by that fiery zone as by a sort of enclosure,
Tertullian, Apology, ch.47

{Rev 21:8; 1 Cor 15:48-53; Mt 13:50; Mk 9:43; Isa 66:24; Jude 1:7}
Location 43465
the servants of God, ever with God, clothed upon with the proper substance of eternity; but the profane, and all who are not true worshippers of God, in like manner shall be consigned to the punishment of everlasting fire- that fire which, from its very nature indeed, directly ministers to their incorruptibility.
Tertullian, Apology, ch.48

{1 Pet 4:17-18; 2 Pet 3:10-12}
Location 43471
The mountains burn, and last. How will it be with the wicked and the enemies of God?
Tertullian, Apology, ch.48

{1 Pet 1:6-7; Heb 11:13-16; Heb 12:22-29}
Location 43476
let them be absurd if you will, yet they are of use: they make all who believe them better men and women, under the fear of never-ending punishment and the hope of never-ending bliss.
Tertullian, Apology, ch.49

{Roman Law}
Location 43480
if they are false and foolish, they hurt nobody. For they are just (in that case) like many other things on which you inflict no penalties- foolish and fabulous things, I mean, which, as quite innocuous, are never charged
Tertullian, Apology, ch.49

{Persecution; Mt 10:17-39}
Location 43492
It is our battle to be summoned to your tribunals that there, under fear of execution, we may battle for the truth. But the day is won when the object of the struggle is gained.
Tertullian, Apology, ch.50

{2 Cor 13:4; 2 Cor 12:10; 2 Cor 4:8-12}
Location 43494
Therefore we conquer in dying; we go forth victorious at the very time we are subdued.
Tertullian, Apology, ch.50

{Persecution}
Location 43502
Anaxarchus, when he was being beaten to death by a barley-pounder, cried out, "Beat on, beat on at the body of Anaxarchus; no stroke falls on Anaxarchus himself."
Tertullian, Apology, ch.50

{Persecution; Rom 8:35-39}
Location 43517
The oftener we are mown down by you, the more in number we grow; the blood of Christians is seed.
Tertullian, Apology, ch.50

{Rom 8:17-18; Phil 3:10; Phil 1:29; 2 Tim 2:3-13; 2 Tim 3:10-12}
Location 43520
For who that contemplates it, is not excited to inquire what is at the bottom of it? who, after inquiry, does not embrace our doctrines? and when he has embraced them, desires not to suffer that he may become partaker of the fulness of God's grace,
Tertullian, Apology, ch.50

{Rom 8:31-34; Isa 50:8-9}
Location 43524
when we are condemned by you, we are acquitted by the Highest.
Tertullian, Apology, ch.50

{Moses}
I. I have conceived the idea of writing the life of Moses, who, according to the account of some persons, was the lawgiver of the Jews, but according to others only an interpreter of the sacred laws, the greatest and most perfect man that ever lived,   location 17075   
Philo, On the Life of Moses, Bk. 1, ch. 1.

{Moses}
the historians who have flourished among the Greeks have not chosen to think him [Moses] worthy of mention,   location 17080   
Philo, On the Life of Moses, Bk. 1

{Moses}
shall proceed to narrate the events which befell him, having learnt them both from those sacred scriptures which he has left as marvelous memorials of his wisdom, and having also heard many things from the elders of my nation, for I have continually connected together what I have heard with what I have read, and in this way I look upon it that I am acquainted with the history of his life more accurately than other people.  location 17087   
Philo, On the Life of Moses, Bk. 1

{Gen 41:53-54; Ps 104:27; Ps 145:15; Ps 104:21; Ps 136:25}
for the river of that country [Egypt] at the height of summer, when they say that all other rivers which are derived from winter torrents and from springs in the ground are smaller, rises and increases, and overflows so as to irrigate all the lands, and make them one vast lake. And so the land, without having any need of rain, supplies every year an unlimited abundance of every kind of good food, unless sometimes the anger of God interrupts this abundance   location 17093   
Philo, On the Life of Moses, Bk. 1

{Ex 6:14-20}
and Moses is the seventh generation in succession from the original settler in the country who was the founder of the whole race of the Jews.  location 17099   
Philo, On the Life of Moses, Bk. 1

{Acts 7:20; Ex 2:2-3}
Then, as was natural for people involved in a miserable misfortune, they accused themselves as having brought a heavier affliction on themselves than they need have done. "For why," said they, "did we not expose him at the first moment of his birth?" For people in general do not look upon one who has not lived long enough to partake of salutary food as a human being at all. "But we, in our superfluous affection, have nourished him these three entire months, causing ourselves by such conduct more abundant grief, and inflicting upon him a heavier punishment,   location 17114   
Philo, On the Life of Moses, Bk. 1

{Acts 7:21; Ex 2:5-9}
Now the king of the country had an only daughter, whom he tenderly loved, and they say that she, although she had been married a long time, had never had any children, and therefore, as was natural, was very desirous of children, and especially of male offspring, which should succeed to the noble inheritance of her father's prosperity and imperial authority, which was otherwise in danger of being lost,   location 17122   
Philo, On the Life of Moses, Bk. 1

{Ex 2:10}
Then she gave him a name, calling him Moses with great propriety, because she had received him out of the water, for the Egyptians call water "mos."  location 17137   
Philo, On the Life of Moses, Bk. 1

{Acts 7:21-22; Ex 2:10}
[Pharoah's daughter] adopted him [Moses] as her son, having first put in practice all sorts of contrivances to increase the apparent bulk of her belly, so that he might be looked upon as her own genuine child, and not as a supposititious one; but God easily brings to pass whatever he is inclined to effect, however difficult it may be to bring to a successful issue.  location 17142   
Philo, On the Life of Moses, Bk. 1

{Moses; Acts 7:22; Ex 2:10}
Therefore the child [Moses] being now thought worthy of a royal education and a royal attendance, was not, like a mere child, long delighted with toys and objects of laughter and amusement,   location 17145   
Philo, On the Life of Moses, Bk. 1

{Moses; Acts 7:22; Ex 2:10}
but he [Moses] himself exhibited a modest and dignified deportment in all his words and gestures, attending diligently to every lesson of every kind which could tend to the improvement of his mind.  location 17147   
Philo, On the Life of Moses, Bk. 1

{Acts 7:22; Moses}
And immediately he [Moses] had all kinds of masters, one after another, some coming of their own accord from the neighboring countries and the different districts of Egypt, and some being even procured from Greece by the temptation of large presents. But in a short time he surpassed all their knowledge, anticipating all their lessons by the excellent natural endowments of his own genius;   location 17148   
Philo, On the Life of Moses, Bk. 1

{Moses; Acts 7:22}
Accordingly he [Moses] speedily learned arithmetic, and geometry, and the whole science of rhythm and harmony and metre, and the whole of music, by means of the use of musical instruments, and by lectures on the different arts, and by explanations of each topic; and lessons on these subjects were given him by Egyptian philosophers, who also taught him the philosophy which is contained in symbols, which they exhibit in those sacred characters of hieroglyphics,   location 17157   
Philo, On the Life of Moses, Bk. 1

{Moses; Acts 7:22}
and the philosophers from the adjacent countries taught him [Moses] Assyrian literature and the knowledge of the heavenly bodies so much studied by the Chaldæans.  location 17162   
Philo, On the Life of Moses, Bk. 1

{Moses; Acts 7:22}
And this knowledge he [Moses] derived also from the Egyptians, who study mathematics above all things, and he learnt with great accuracy the state of that art among both the Chaldæans and Egyptians, making himself acquainted with the points in which they agree with and differ from each other  location 17163   
Philo, On the Life of Moses, Bk. 1

{Moses; Acts 7:23-24; Ex 2:11-13}
since his mind was unable to admit any falsehood, as those are accustomed to do who contend violently for one particular side of a question; and who advocate any doctrine which is set before them, whatever it may be, not inquiring whether it deserves to be supported, but acting in the same manner as those lawyers who defend a cause for pay, and are wholly indifferent to the justice of their cause.  location 17166   
Philo, On the Life of Moses, Bk. 1

{Moses; Acts 7:22}
VI. everyone who was acquainted with him [Moses] marveled at him, being astonished as at a novel spectacle, and inquiring what kind of mind it was that had its abode in his body,   location 17179   
Philo, On the Life of Moses, Bk. 1, ch. 6

{Moses; Ex 20:14; 1 Cor 6:9-10}
and as to the pleasures of the organs below the stomach he [Moses] paid no attention to them at all, except as far as the object of having legitimate children was concerned.  location 17182   
Philo, On the Life of Moses, Bk. 1, ch. 6

{Ex 2:11; Acts 7:23}
VII. But Moses, having now reached the very highest point of human good fortune, and being looked upon as the grandson of this mighty king, and being almost considered in the expectations of all men as the future inheritor of his grandfather's kingdom, and being always addressed as the young prince, still felt a desire for and admiration of the education of his kinsmen and ancestors,   location 17197   
Philo, On the Life of Moses, Bk. 1, ch. 7

{Mt 25:35; Deut 10:19; Lev 19:34; Deut 19:29; Lev 19:10; Ex 1:13-14}
for strangers, in my opinion, should be looked upon as refugees, and as the suppliants of those who receive them in their country;  location 17208   
Philo, On the Life of Moses, Bk. 1

{Ex 1:8-14}
he oppressed them and treated them as slaves, though they were not only free men, but also strangers, and suppliants, and sojourners, having no respect for nor any awe of God, who presides over the rights of free men,   location 17213   
Philo, On the Life of Moses, Bk. 1

{Ex 1:13-14}
And they wrought with clay, some of them fashioning it into bricks, and others collecting straw from all quarters, for straw is the bond which binds bricks together; while others, again, had the task allotted to them of building up houses, and walls, and gates, and cutting trenches, bearing wood themselves day and night without interruption, having no rest or respite, and not even being allowed time so much as to sleep,   location 17217   
Philo, On the Life of Moses, Bk. 1

{Ex 1:13-14}
so that in a short time their bodies failed them, their souls having already fainted beneath their afflictions. And so they died, one after another, as if smitten by a pestilential destruction, and then their taskmasters threw their bodies away unburied beyond the borders of the land,   location 17221   
Philo, On the Life of Moses, Bk. 1

{Ex 2:11-12; Ex 1:13-14}
subjecting them [the Israelites] to every kind of ill-treatment, so as even to be the death of many, Moses slew [an Egyptian], thinking the deed a pious action;  location 17240   
Philo, On the Life of Moses, Bk. 1

{Ex 2:15}
When the king heard of this action [Moses killing an Egyptian] he was very indignant, thinking it an intolerable thing, not for one man to be dead, or for another to have killed him, whether justly or unjustly, but for his grandson not to agree with him, and not to look upon his friends or his enemies as his own, but to hate persons whom the king loved, and to love persons whom the king looked upon as outcasts, and to pity those whom he regarded with unchangeable and implacable aversion.  location 17242   
Philo, On the Life of Moses, Bk. 1

{Ex 2:15}
they [enemies of Moses] poured in, at all times and from all quarters, thousands and thousands of calumnies into the willing ears of his [Moses'] grandfather, so that they even implanted in his mind an apprehension that Moses was plotting to deprive him of his kingdom, saying to him: "He will strip you of your crown. He has no humble designs or notions. He is continually seeking to busy himself in what does not concern him."  location 17247   
Philo, On the Life of Moses, Bk. 1

{Ex 2:15}
As they urged these arguments to the king, Moses retreated to the contiguous country of Arabia,   location 17253   
Philo, On the Life of Moses, Bk. 1


{Ex 2:16}
The Arabs are great breeders of cattle, and they all feed their flocks together, not merely men, but also women, and youths, and maidens with them, and this, too, not merely in the obscurer classes and lower ranks of life, but also among the most eminent persons of the nation.  location 17273   
Philo, On the Life of Moses, Bk. 1

{Ex 2:16-17}
Now there were seven damsels, whose father was the priest, and they all came to a certain fountain leading their flocks, and having loosened their vessels and let them down by thongs they succeeded one another in drawing up the water, so as for them all to have an equal share in the work; and in this way they cheerfully and rapidly filled the troughs which were at hand. And when other shepherds came up they disregarded the weakness of the damsels and endeavored to drive them away with their flocks, and then brought their own herds to the drink that was prepared, desiring to reap the fruits of the labor of others.  location 17275   
Philo, On the Life of Moses, Bk. 1

{Ex 2:17}
and the shepherds, being alarmed at Moses' words, since while he was speaking he appeared inspired, and his appearance became changed, so that he looked like a prophet, and fearing lest he might be uttering divine oracles and predictions, they obeyed and became submissive, and brought back the flock of the maidens to the troughs, first of all removing their own cattle.    location 17288   
Philo, On the Life of Moses, Bk. 1

{Ex 2:21}
and so Jethro gave Moses the most beautiful of his daughters to be his wife,   location 17300   
Philo, On the Life of Moses, Bk. 1

{Ex 3:1; Jn 10:11}
And after his marriage, Moses took his father-in-law's herds and tended them, ... for the business of a shepherd is a preparation for the office of a king to anyone who is destined to preside over that most manageable of all flocks,   location 17303 
Philo, On the Life of Moses, Bk. 1

{Ex 3:1}
XII. Therefore Moses, having become the most skilful herdsman of his time, and the most prudent provider of all the necessary things for his flock,   location 17312   
Philo, On the Life of Moses, Bk. 1, ch.12

{Ex 3:2; Acts 7:30}
And in the middle of the flame [in the bush] there was seen a certain very beautiful form, not resembling any visible thing, a most Godlike image, emitting a light more brilliant than fire, which any one might have imagined to be the image of the living God.   location 17324   
Philo, On the Life of Moses, Bk. 1

{Ex 3:2; Acts 7:30}
But let it [angel in the burning bush] be called an angel, because it merely related (dieµngelleto) the events which were about to happen in a silence more distinct than any voice   location 17325   
Philo, On the Life of Moses, Bk. 1

{Hermeneutics; Ex 3:2; Acts 7:30}
For the burning bush was a symbol of the oppressed people, and the burning fire was a symbol of the oppressors;   location 17327   
Philo, On the Life of Moses, Bk. 1

{Ex 3:2; Acts 7:30}
The angel [in the bush], again, was the emblem of the providence of God, who mitigates circumstances which appear very formidable,   location 17330   
Philo, On the Life of Moses, Bk. 1

{Ex 3:14}
XIII.  And God said, "At first say unto them, I am that I am, that when they have learnt that there is a difference between him that is and him that is not, they may be further taught that there is no name whatever that can properly be assigned to me, who am the only being to whom existence belongs.  location 17354   
Philo, On the Life of Moses, Bk. 1, ch.13

{Ex 3:15; Ex 3:6}
tell them not only this one fact that I am God, but also that I am the God of those men who have derived their names from virtue, that I am the God of Abraham, and the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob,   location 17357   
Philo, On the Life of Moses, Bk. 1

{Ex 4:10}
But though Moses believed the words of God, nevertheless he tried to avoid the office to which God was appointing him, urging that he was a man of a weak voice, and slow of speech, and not eloquent,   location 17377   
Philo, On the Life of Moses, Bk. 1

{Ex 4:10; Ex 4:13}
and being also prudent and cautious by nature, Moses shrunk from the undertaking, thinking such great matters proper for proud and bold men and not for him. And he entreated God to choose someone else   location 17380   
Philo, On the Life of Moses, Bk. 1

{Ex 4:11-12; Ex 4:14-16}
but the stream of thy words shall flow forth in a rapid and smooth current as if from a pure fountain. And if there is any need of an interpreter, thou [Moses] shall have thy brother, who will be a subordinate mouthpiece for thee, that he may utter to the multitude the words which he receives from thee, while thou utterest to him the words that thou receivest from God."  location 17384
Philo, On the Life of Moses, Bk. 1   


{Ex 4:29-31; Ex 3:16-17}
[Moses and Aaron] first of all collected together the elders of the nation in a secret place, and there they laid the commands of God before them,   location 17391   
Philo, On the Life of Moses, Bk. 1

{Ex 7:4; Ex 3:20}
and accordingly, those foolish men, whom reason and command could not influence, are corrected by a series of afflictions: and ten punishments were inflicted on the land;  location 17421   
Philo, On the Life of Moses, Bk. 1

{Ex 7:4; Ex 3:20}
XVII. For the elements of the universe, earth, water, air, and fire, of which the world was made, were all by the command of God, brought into a state of hostility against them,   location 17424   
Philo, On the Life of Moses, Bk. 1, ch.17

{Hermeneutics}
entrusting three, those which proceeded from those elements which are composed of more solid parts, namely, earth and water, from which all the corporeal distinctive realities are perfected, to the brother of Moses. An equal number, those which proceeded from the elements which are the most prolific of life, namely, air and fire, he committed to Moses himself alone. One, the seventh, he entrusted to both in common; the other three, to make up the whole number of ten, he reserved for himself.  location 17428   
Philo, On the Life of Moses, Bk. 1

{Ex 7:20-21}
his rod upon the river, and immediately, throughout its whole course, from Ethiopia down to the sea, it is changed into blood and simultaneously with its change, all the lakes, and ditches, and fountains, and wells, and spring, and every particle of water in all Egypt, was changed into blood, so that, for lack of drink, they dug round about the banks of the river, but the streams that came up were like veins of the body in a hmorrhage, and spirted up channels of blood like springs, no transparent water being seen anywhere. And all the different kinds of fish died,   location 17434   
Philo, On the Life of Moses, Bk. 1

{Ex 8:15}
And yet it was so powerful that all Egypt fainted under the host of them, and was compelled to cry out, that "this is the anger of God."  location 17476   
Philo, On the Life of Moses, Bk. 1

{Ex 9:23-24}
For Egypt almost alone, if you except those countries which lie to the south of the equator, never is subject to that one of the seasons of the year which is called winter, perhaps, as some say, from the fact of its not being at any great distance from the torrid zone,   location 17482   
Philo, On the Life of Moses, Bk. 1

{Ex 9:23-24}
for the river begins to rise at the beginning of the summer, and to fall towards the end of summer; during which period the etesian gales increase in violence blowing from a direction opposite to the mouths of the Nile, and by which it is prevented from flowing freely into the sea,   location 17485   
Philo, On the Life of Moses, Bk. 1

{Ex 9:23-24}
And then when the two streams meet together, the river descending from its sources above, and the waters which ought to escape abroad being turned back by the beating of the sea, and not being able to extend their breadth, for the banks on each side of the river confine its streams, the river, as is natural, rises to a height, and breaks its bounds;  location 17489   
Philo, On the Life of Moses, Bk. 1

{Ex 9:23-24}
since the country beyond Memphis, where the palace of the king of Egypt is, does never even see snow at all; now, on the contrary, the air suddenly assumed a new appearance, so that all the things which are seen in the most stormy and wintry countries, come upon it all together; abundance of rain, and torrents of dense and ceaseless hail, and heavy winds met together and beat against one another with violence; and the clouds burst, and there were incessant lightnings, and thunders,   location 17498   
Philo, On the Life of Moses, Bk. 1

{Ex 9:25}
by which also great numbers of animals were destroyed, some in consequence of the exceeding cold, others though the weight of the hail which fell upon them, as if they had been stoned, while some again were destroyed by the fire of the lightning.  location 17507   
Philo, On the Life of Moses, Bk. 1

{Ex 10:7}
And then at length the men in authority came, though late, to an accurate perception of the evils that had come upon them, and came and said to the king, "How long wilt thou refuse to permit the men to depart? Dost thou not understand, from what has already taken place, that Egypt is destroyed?" And the king agreed to all they said, yielding as far as appearances went at least; but again, when the evil was abated at the prayer of Moses,   location 17517   
Philo, On the Life of Moses, Bk. 1

{Ex 10:22-23}
And at this time they say that some persons threw themselves on their beds, and did not venture to rise up, and that some, when any of the necessities of nature overtook them, could only move with difficulty by feeling their way along the walls or whatever else they could lay hold of, like so many blind men; for even the light of the fire lit for necessary uses was either extinguished by the violence of the storm, or else it was made invisible and overwhelmed by the density of the darkness,   location 17525   
Philo, On the Life of Moses, Bk. 1

{Ex 9:8-10}
Then a dust arose on a sudden, and produced a terrible, and most painful, and incurable ulceration over the whole skin both of man and of the brute beasts; and immediately their bodies became swollen with the pustules, having blisters all over them full of matter which any one might have supposed were burning   location 17537   
Philo, On the Life of Moses, Bk. 1

{Ex 9:23; Ex 10:13; Ex 12:29}
XXIII. The remaining punishments [against Egypt] are three in number, and they were inflicted by God himself without any agency or ministration of man,   location 17546   
Philo, On the Life of Moses, Bk. 1, ch.23

{Ex 8:1-6; Ex 8:21}
The first is that which was inflicted by means of that animal which is the boldest in all nature, namely, the dog-fly (kynomuia)  ... It is a biting and treacherous creature; for it shoots in from a distance with a whizzing sound like an arrow; and when it has reached its mark it sticks very closely with great force.  location 17552   
Philo, On the Life of Moses, Bk. 1, ch.23

{Ex 9:25}
And after the dog-fly there followed another punishment unconnected with any human agency, namely, the mortality among the cattle; for all the herds of oxen, and flocks of goats, and vast flocks of sheep, and all the beasts of burden, and all other domestic animals of every kind died in one day in a body,   location 17556   
Philo, On the Life of Moses, Bk. 1, ch.23

{Ex 12:29-30}
XXIV. only passed sentence of death on all the first-born, beginning with the eldest of the king's sons, and ceasing with the first-born son of the most obscure grinder at the mill;  ... 
for a while, they remained in their houses, no one being aware of the misfortune which had befallen his neighbor, but lamenting only for his individual loss. But when any one went out of doors and learnt the misfortunes of others also, he at once felt a double sorrow, grieving for the common calamity, ... ran weeping to the king's palace, and rent their clothes, and cried out against the sovereign, as the cause of all the terrible evils that had befallen them. "For if," said they, "immediately when Moses at the beginning first came to him he had allowed his nation to depart, we should never have experienced any one of the miseries that have befallen us at all.  location 17575   
Philo, On the Life of Moses, Bk. 1, ch.24

{Ex 12:33}
But Pharoah yielded to his natural obstinacy and haughtiness, and so we have reaped the ready reward of his unreasonable contentiousness." Then one man encouraged another to drive the Jewish people with all speed out of the whole country, and not to allow them to remain one day, or rather one single hour, looking upon every moment that they abode among them as an irremediable calamity. 
Philo, On the Life of Moses, Bk. 1, ch.24

{Ex 12:35-36; Mt 5:40-42 x}
XXV. So they [the Israelites], being now driven out of the land and pursued, coming at last to a proper notion of their own nobility and worth, ... for they carried off abundant booty, which they themselves collected, by means of the hatred in which they were held, and some of it they carried themselves, submitting to heavy burdens, and some they placed upon their beasts of burden, not in order to gratify any love of money, or, as any usurer might say, because they coveted their neighbors' goods. (How should they do so?) But, first of all, because they were thus receiving the necessary wages from those whom they had served for so long a time; and, secondly, because they had a right to afflict those at whose hands they had suffered wrong with afflictions slighter than, and by no means equal to, what they had endured. For how can the deprivation of money and treasures be equivalent to the loss of liberty?  ... on behalf of which those who are in possession of their senses dare not only to cast away all their property, but even to venture their lives?   location 17588  
 Philo, On the Life of Moses, Bk. 1, ch.25

{Ex 8:22-23; Ex 9:4; Ex 9:26; Ex 10:23; Ex 11:7}
XXVI. Such, then, were the afflictions and punishments by which Egypt was corrected; not one of which ever touched the Hebrews, although they were dwelling in the same cities and villages, and even houses, as the Egyptians, and touching the same earth and water, and air and fire, which are all component parts of nature, and which it is impossible to escape from.  location 17594   
Philo, On the Life of Moses, Bk. 1, ch.26

{Ex 7:20-21}
by the very same events happening in the same place and at the same time, one people was destroyed and the other people was preserved. The river was changed into blood, but not to the Hebrews; for when these latter went to draw water from it, it underwent another change and became drinkable.  location 17597   
Philo, On the Life of Moses, Bk. 1, ch.26

{Ex 8:1-6}
Frogs went up from the water upon the land, and filled all the market-places, and stables, and dwelling-houses; but they retreated from before the Hebrews alone, as if they had been able to distinguish between the two nations,   location 17599   
Philo, On the Life of Moses, Bk. 1, ch.26

{Ex 8:17; Ex 8:21; Ex 10:13-15}
No lice, no dog-flies, no locusts, which greatly injured the plants [afflicted the Israelites],   location 17601   
Philo, On the Life of Moses, Bk. 1, ch.26

{Ex 12:37-38; Num 11:4}
XXVII. And of those who now went forth out of Egypt and left their abodes in that country, the men of age to bear arms were more than six hundred thousand men, and the other multitude of elders, and children, and women were so great that it was not easy to calculate it. Moreover, there also went forth with them a mixed multitude of various persons collected from all quarters, and servants, like an illegitimate crowd with a body of genuine citizens. ... Among these were those who had been born to Hebrew fathers by Egyptian women, and who were enrolled as members of their father's race. And, also, all those who had admired the decent piety of the men, and therefore joined them; and some, also, who had come over to them, having learned the right way, by reason of the magnitude and multitude of the incessant punishments which had been inflicted on their own countrymen.  location 17614   
Philo, On the Life of Moses, Bk. 1, ch.27


{Moses; Heb 11:24-26}
Therefore Moses alone of all the persons who have ever enjoyed supreme authority, neither accumulated treasures of silver and gold, nor levied taxes, nor acquired possession of houses, or property, or cattle, or servants of his household, or revenues, or anything else which has reference to magnificence and superfluity, although he might have acquired an unlimited abundance of them all. But as he thought it a token of poverty of soul to be anxious about material wealth, he despised it as a blind thing,   location 17632   
Philo, On the Life of Moses, Bk. 1

{Prov 29:2; Prov 29:12}
Therefore, when the chief of a nation begins to indulge in luxury and to turn aside to a delicate and effeminate life, then the whole of his subjects, or very nearly the whole, carry their desire for indulging the appetites of the belly and the parts below the belly beyond all reasonable bounds. ... If, on the other hand, the chief of a people adopts a more austere and dignified course of life, then even those of his subjects, who are inclined to be very incontinent, change and become temperate, hastening, either out of fear or out of shame, to give him an idea that they are devoted to the same pursuits and inclinations that he is; and, in fact, the lower orders will never, no, nor will mad men even, reject the customs and habits of their superiors:  location 17665   
Philo, On the Life of Moses, Bk. 1

{Ex 13:17-18}
Moses conducted his people as a colony into Phoenicia, and into the hollow Syria (Coele-syria), and Palestine, which was at that time called the land of the Canaanites, the borders of which country were three days' journey distant from Egypt. Then he led them forward, not by the shortest road, partly because he was afraid lest the inhabitants should come out to meet and to resist him in his march, from fear of being overthrown and enslaved by such a multitude, and so, if a war arose, they might be again driven back into Egypt,   location 17672   
Philo, On the Life of Moses, Bk. 1

{Ex 13:21-22; Ex 33:20; Jn 1:18; Jn 6:46; Col 1:15; 1 Tim 6:16; 1 Jn 4:12}
for a cloud, fashioned into the form of a vast pillar, went before the multitude by day, giving forth a light like that of the sun, ... but by night it displayed a fiery blaze, in order that the Hebrews might not wander on their journey, but might follow the guidance of their leader along the road, without any deviation. Perhaps, indeed, this was one of the ministers of the mighty King, an unseen messenger, a guide of the way enveloped in this cloud, whom it was not lawful for men to behold with the eyes of the body.  location 17682   
Philo, On the Life of Moses, Bk. 1

{Ex 15:1-21}
seeing the instantaneous and complete destruction of the enemy, formed two choruses, one of men and the other of women, on the seashore, and sang hymns of gratitude to God, Moses leading the song of the men, and his sister that of the women; for these two persons were the leaders of the choruses.  location 17736   
Philo, On the Life of Moses, Bk. 1

{Ex 15:25}
and showed Moses a piece of wood which he bade him take up and throw into the water, which indeed had been made by nature with such a power for that purpose, and which perhaps had a quality which was previously unknown, or perhaps was then first endowed with it,   location 17755   
Philo, On the Life of Moses, Bk. 1

{Hermeneutics; Ex 15:27; Num 11:26}
so they arrive at a second halting place, well supplied with water, and well shaded with trees, called Aileem, irrigated with twelve fountains, near which were young and vigorous trunks of palm trees to the number of seventy, ... For the nation itself was divided into twelve tribes, each of which, if pious and religious, would be looked upon in the light of a fountain, since piety is continually pouring forth everlasting and unceasing springs of virtuous actions. And the elders and chiefs of the whole nation were seventy in number, being therefore very naturally likened to palm trees, which are the most excellent of all trees, being both most beautiful to behold, and bearing the most exquisite fruit,   location 17767   
Philo, On the Life of Moses, Bk. 1

{Ex 16:14}
but what was now rained down upon them was a very small and light grain, like millet, which, by reason of its incessant fall, rested in heaps before the camp, a most extraordinary sight. And the Hebrews marveled at it, and inquired of the commander what this rain was,   location 17807   
Philo, On the Life of Moses, Bk. 1

{Sabbath; Ex 16:22-26}
But the holy seventh day had an especial honour; for, as it is not permitted to do anything whatever on that day (and it is expressly commanded that men are then to abstain from every work, great or little), so that they were not able to collect food that day, instead of food for one day, God rained upon them a double quantity, and ordered them to collect what shall be food enough for two days.  location 17822   
Philo, On the Life of Moses, Bk. 1

{Ex 17:5-6; Jn 4:13-14}
being inspired by God, [Moses] smote the precipitous rock. And the rock being struck this seasonable blow, whether it was that there was a spring previously concealed beneath it, or whether water was then for the first time conveyed into it by invisible channels pouring in all together and being forced out with violence, at all events the rock, I say, was cleft open by the force of the blow and poured forth water in a stream, ... being forced out with violence, at all events the rock, I say, was cleft open by the force of the blow and poured forth water in a stream, so that it not only then furnished a relief from thirst, but also supplied for a long time an abundance of drink for so many myriads of people. For they filled all their water vessels, as they had done before, from the fountains which were bitter by nature, but which, by divine providence, were changed to sweet water.  location 17844   
Philo, On the Life of Moses, Bk. 1

{Ex 17:11-12}
for [the arms of Moses] became by turns lighter and heavier. Then, whenever they were lighter, so that he could hold them up on high, the alliance between God and his people was strengthened, and waxed mighty, and became more glorious.  location 17872   
Philo, On the Life of Moses, Bk. 1

{Num 13:1-20}
XL. After this battle he considered that it was proper to reconnoiter the country into which the nation was being led as a colony (and it was now the second year that they had been traveling), not wishing that his followers should (as is often the case) change their designs out of ignorance,   location 17882   
Philo, On the Life of Moses, Bk. 1, ch. 40

{Num 13:17-20; Num 13:23}
"Now what we wish to know consists of three points; the number of the inhabitants, and the strength of their cities, whether they are planted in favorable situations, whether they are strongly built and fortified, or the contrary. As to the country, we wish to know whether it has a deep and rich soil, whether it is good to bear all kinds of fruits, both of such plants as are raised from seed and of fruit-trees; ... the season which is now present; for in the season of spring what has been sown is coming to perfection, and the natures of the trees are beginning to propagate themselves further. It will be better, therefore, for you to enter the land now, and to remain till the middle of the summer, and to bring back with you fruits, as samples of what is to be procured   location 17904   
Philo, On the Life of Moses, Bk. 1, ch. 51.

{Num 14:6-9; Num 13:25-33}
XLII. the whole body of the spies not at all agreeing with respect to some points of necessary importance. Accordingly, there were a great many contest between them even before they returned to the camp, but not very serious ones, in order that there might not be seditions between them from any of them adhering very contentiously to his own opinion, or from different persons giving different accounts, but they became more violent after their return;  ... the cowardly spreading cowardice, and the indomitable and bold diffusing confidence united with sanguine hope. But these last made but a fifth part of those who were frightened out of their senses, while they, on the other hand, were five times as numerous as the high-spirited; ... for they who maintained the better side of the question were only two, while those who made the contrary report were ten;  location 17938   
Philo, On the Life of Moses, Bk. 1

{Num 14:6-9; Num 13:25-33}
For of the spies, the ten who brought back cowardly tiding all perished by a pestilential disease, with those of the multitude who united in their feelings of despondency, and only the two who had agreed and counselled the people not to fear but to persevere in the plan of the colony were saved,   location 17945   
Philo, On the Life of Moses, Bk. 1

{Num 14:34}
accordingly, for thirty-eight years more, after the two years which I have already mentioned as having elapsed, the life of a complete generation of mankind did they wander up and down, traversing the pathless wilderness;  location 17952  
Philo, On the Life of Moses, Bk. 1

{Gen 25:31-34; Gen 27:41}
[Esau] had given up his birthright to his brother, yet a short time afterwards endeavored to assert his claim to what he had abandoned voluntarily, violating his agreement, and he sought to slay his brother, threatening him with death if he did not surrender what he had purchased.  location 17968   
Philo, On the Life of Moses, Bk. 1

{Num 21:16-18; Jn 2:7-11}
XLVI. A short time afterwards, having found a copious spring of water which supplied drink to all the multitude, and the spring was in a well and on the borders of the country, drawing it up and drinking it as though it had been not water but pure wine, they were refreshed in their souls, and those among the people who loved God established choruses and dances in a circle around the well, ... For this well had been originally cut not by the hands of private individuals, but of kings, who had labored in rivalry of one another, as the tale went, not only in the discovery of the water, but likewise in the digging of the well, in order that by its magnificence it might be seen to be a royal work, and that the power and magnanimity of those who built it might appear from the beginning.  location 18018   
Philo, On the Life of Moses, Bk. 1, ch. 46

{Num 21:21-23}
the king, whose name was Sihon, exhorting him to the same measures to which he had previously invited his kinsman. But he not only replied to these ambassadors when they came with great insolence, but he very nearly put them to death, and would have done so if the law with respect to ambassadors had not hindered him;  location 18025   
Philo, On the Life of Moses, Bk. 1

{Num 22:5-41; 2 Pet 2:15; Jude 11; Rev 2:14; Num 31:8; Josh 13:22; Neh 13:2; Mic 6:5}
Now there was a man at that time very celebrated for his skill in divination, dwelling in Mesopotamia, who was initiated in every branch of the soothsayers' art. And he was celebrated and renowned above all men for his experience as a diviner and prophet, as he had in many instances foretold to many people incredible and most important events; for, on one occasion, he had predicted heavy rain to one nation at the height of summer; to another he had foretold a drought and burning heat in the middle of winter. Others he had forewarned of a dearth which should follow a season of abundance; and, on the other hand, plenty after famine. In some instances he had predicted the inundations of rivers; or, on the contrary, their falling greatly and becoming dried up; and the departure of pestilential diseases, and ten thousand other things. From all which he had obtained a name of wide celebrity,   location 18043   
Philo, On the Life of Moses, Bk. 1

{Num 22:21-35}
The truth is, that there was, as it seems, a divine vision, which, as the beast, on which the diviner was seeking, saw at a great distance as it was coming towards him, and it was frightened at it; but the man did not see it, which was a proof of his insensibility, for he was thus shown to be inferior to a brute beast in the power of sight, at a time when he was boasting that he could see, not only the whole world, but also the Creator of the world.  location 18067   
Philo, On the Life of Moses, Bk. 1

{Num 22:31}
Accordingly, having after some time seen the angel opposing him,   location 18071 
 Philo, On the Life of Moses, Bk. 1
 
{Num 24:12-13}
But Balaam, his moment of inspiration being now past, replied: "I am exposed in this to a most unjust charge, and am undeservedly accused; for I am saying nothing of my own, but whatever the Deity prompts me to say."  location 18104   
Philo, On the Life of Moses, Bk. 1

{Num 25:1-2; Prov 7:6-27}
"And let any maiden who is thus prepared for the sport resist, and say, wantonly, to a lover who is thus influenced, "It is not fitting for you to enjoy my society till you have first abandoned your native habits, and have changed, and learned to honour the same practices that I do. And I must have a conspicuous proof of your real change, which I can only have by your consenting to join me in the same sacrifices and libations which I use, and which we may then offer together at the same images and statues, and other erections in honour of my gods. And the lover being, as it were, taken in the net of her manifold and multiform snares, not being able to resist her beauty and seductive behavior... and, like a miserable man, will obey all the commands which she lays upon him, and will be enrolled as the slave of passion."     location 18158   
Philo, On the Life of Moses, Bk. 1

{Num 25:1-9; Num 31:16; 2 Pet 2:15; Rev 2:14}
LV. This, then, was the advice which Balaam gave to Balak. ... He exhorted the women to admit to their favors, without any restraint, every man whom they chose. Accordingly, when licence was thus given, they brought over a multitude of young men, having already long before this seduced their minds, and having by their tricks and allurements perverted them to impiety; until Phinehas, the son of the chief priest, being exceedingly indignant at all that was taking place ... For when he saw a man of his nation sacrificing with and then entering into the tent of a harlot, and that too without casting his eyes down on the ground and seeking to avoid the notice of the multitude, but making a display of his licentiousness with shameless boldness, ... Phinehas, I say, being very indignant and being filled with a just anger, ran in, and while they were still lying on the bed, slew both the lover and the harlot, cutting them in two pieces in the middle,     location 18171   
Philo, On the Life of Moses, Bk. 1, ch.55

{Num 25:5; Ex 32:25-29}
When some persons of those who admired temperance, and chastity, and piety, saw this example, they, at the command of Moses, imitated it, and slew all their own relations and friends, even to a man, who had sacrificed to idols made with hands, and thus they effaced the stain which was defiling the nation by this implacable revenge   location 18176   
Philo, On the Life of Moses, Bk. 1

{Num 25:3-9}
Therefore they did not allow any escape whatever to those who sinned in this way, and such conduct is the truest praise; and they say that twenty-four thousand men were slain in one day, the common pollution, which was defiling the whole army, being thus at once got rid of.  location 18181   
Philo, On the Life of Moses, Bk. 1

{Num 25:10-13; Ps 106:30-31}
in addition to this peace, he gave [Phinehas] the perpetual possession of the priesthood, an inheritance to his family, which could not be taken from it.  location 18185   
Philo, On the Life of Moses, Bk. 1

{Num 25:7-8}
Anyone who did not know what had taken place, might have supposed, when he saw them returning, that they were coming in, not from war and from a pitched battle, but rather from a display and field-day of exercise under arms, such as often take place in time of peace; and these field-days are days of exercise and practice, while the men train themselves among friends to attack their enemies.  location 18207   
Philo, On the Life of Moses, Bk. 1

{Heb 9:22; Ex 20:13}
commanded to purify both the men themselves, and those of their allies who had returned from fighting by their side, of bloodshed; for even though the slaughter of the enemies of one's country is according to law, still he who kills a man, even though justly and in self-defence, and because he has been attacked, still appears to be guilty of blood by reason of his supreme and common relationship to a common father; on which account those who had slain enemies were in need of rites of purification, to cleanse them from what was looked upon as a pollution.  location 18219   
Philo, On the Life of Moses, Bk. 1

{Num 31}
LIX. All these wars were carried on and brought to an end before the Hebrews had crossed the Jordan, the river of the country, being wars against the inhabitants of the country on the other side of Jordan,   location 18242   
Philo, On the Life of Moses, Bk. 1, ch.59

{Moses}
I have now, then, given an account of what was done by Moses while invested with kingly power. I must now proceed to relate in order all the actions which he performed in accordance with virtue, and also successfully as a chief priest, and also in his character as a lawgiver; for he also exercised these two powers as very closely connected with his kingly authority.  location 18293  Philo, On the Life of Moses, Bk. 1

{Circumcision; Gen 17:10-14; Acts 7:8; Lev 12:3; Jn 7:22}
I. The genera and heads of all special laws, which are called "the ten commandments," have been discussed with accuracy in the former treatise. We must now proceed to consider the particular commands as we read them in the subsequent passages of the holy scriptures; and we will begin with that which is turned into ridicule by people in general. (2) The ordinance of circumcision of the parts of generation is ridiculed, though it is an act which is practised to no slight degree among other nations also, and most especially by the Egyptians, who appear to me to be the most populous of all nations, and the most abounding in all kinds of wisdom. (3) In consequence of which it would be most fitting for men to discard childish ridicule, and to investigate the real causes of the ordinance with more prudence and dignity, considering the reasons why the custom has prevailed, and not being precipitate, so as without examination to condemn the folly of mighty nations, recollecting that it is not probable that so many myriads should be circumcised in every generation, mutilating the bodies of themselves and of their nearest relations, in a manner which is accompanied with severe pain, without adequate cause; but that there are many reasons which might encourage men to persevere and continue a custom which has been introduced by previous generations, and that these are from reasons of the greatest weight and importance. (4) First of all, that it is a preventive of a painful disease, and of an affliction difficult to be cured, which they call a carbuncle; [Fn. the Greek word is anthrax, which also signifies a coal. The Latin, from which our carbuncle is derived, carbunculus, a diminutive of carbo, which also means a coal.] because, I imagine, when it becomes inflamed it burns; from which fact it has derived that appellation. And this disease is very apt to be engendered among those who have not undergone the rite of circumcision. (5) Secondly, it secures the cleanliness of the whole body in a way that is suited to the people consecrated to God; with which object the Egyptian priests, being extravagant in their case, shave the whole of their bodies; for some of these evils which ought to be got rid of are collected in and lodge under the hair and the prepuce. (6) Thirdly, there is the resemblance of the part that is circumcised to the heart; for both parts are prepared for the sake of generation; for the breath contained within the heart is generative of thoughts, and the generative organ itself is productive of living beings. Therefore, the men of old thought it right to make the evident and visible organ, by which the objects of the outward senses are generated, resemble that invisible and superior part, by means of which ideas are formed. (7) The fourth, and most important, is that which relates to the provision thus made [to enable them to be] prolific; for it is said that the seminal fluid proceeds in its path easily, neither being at all scattered, nor flowing on its passage into what may be called the bags of the prepuce. On which account those nations which practise circumcision are the most prolific and the most populous.
location 19943-19963   
Philo, The Special Laws I, ch. 1

{Hermeneutics}
II. These considerations have come to our ears, having been discussed of old among men of divine spirit and wisdom, who have interpreted the writings of Moses in no superficial or careless manner.  location 19963   
Philo, The Special Laws I, ch.2

{Circumcision; Gen 17:10-14}
First of all, it is a symbol of the excision of the pleasures which delude the mind; for since, of all the delights which pleasure can afford, the association of man with woman is the most exquisite, it seemed good to the Lawgivers to mutilate the organ which ministers to such connections;  location 19966   
Philo, The Special Laws I, ch.2

{Circumcision; Gen 17:10-14; Rom 2:29}
The second thing is, that it is a symbol of a man's knowing himself, and discarding that terrible disease, the vain opinion of the soul;  location 19969   
Philo, The Special Laws I, ch.2

{Gen 1:1; Ps 90:1-2}
III. Some persons have conceived that the sun, and the moon, and the other stars are independent gods, to whom they have attributed the causes of all things that exist. But Moses was well aware that the world was created, and was like a very large city, having rulers and subjects in it; the rulers being all the bodies which are in heaven, such as planets and fixed stars; and the subjects being all the natures beneath the moon, hovering in the air and adjacent to the earth.  location 19979   
Philo, The Special Laws I, ch.3

{Gen 1:28; Ps 115:16; Rom 13:1}
But that the rulers aforesaid are not independent and absolute, but are the viceroys of one supreme Being, the Father of all, in imitation of whom they administer with propriety and success the charge committed to their care, as he also presides over all created things in strict accordance with justice and with law.  location 19982   
Philo, The Special Laws I, ch.3

{Dt 4:19; Judg 5:20; Job 25:5; Job 38:7; Heb 1:14; Ps 103:20-21; 1 Cor 2:14}
We must, therefore, look on all those bodies in the heaven, which the outward sense regards as gods, not as independent rulers, since they are assigned the work of lieutenants, being by their intrinsic nature responsible to a higher power, but by reason of their virtue not actually called to render in an account of their doings. So that, transcending all visible essence by means of our reason, let us press forward to the honor of that everlasting and invisible Being who can be comprehended and appreciated by the mind alone;  location 19998   
Philo, The Special Laws I, ch.3

{Ex 20:23}
"You shall not make to yourselves gods of silver and gold;" (Exodus 20:20),  location 20009   
Philo, The Special Laws I, ch.4

{Ex 20:23; 1 Tim 6:10}
And, besides this distinct prohibition, there is another meaning which appears to me to be intended to be figuratively conveyed under these words, which is one of very great influence as contributing to the formation of the moral character, and which convicts in no slight degree those who are covetous of money and who seek to procure silver and gold from all quarters, and when they have acquired it treasure it up, as though it were some divine image, in their inmost shrines, looking upon it as the cause of all good things and of all happiness. And all the poor men that are possessed of that terrible disease, the love of money, but who, from not having any riches of their own which they can think worthy of their attention, fix their admiration on the wealth of their neighbors, and, for the purpose of offering adoration to it, come the first thing in the morning to the houses of those who have abundance, as if they were noble temples at which they were going to offer prayers, and to entreat blessings from their owners as if from the gods.  location 20012   
Philo, The Special Laws I, ch.4

{Lev 19:4; Mt 6:24; Col 3:5}
And to these men, Moses says, in another passage, "You shall not follow images, and you shall not make to yourselves molten gods." (Leviticus 19:4.) Teaching them, by figurative language, that it is not right to pay such honors to wealth as one would pay to the gods; for those celebrated materials of wealth, silver and gold, are made to be used, which, however, the multitude follows, looking upon them as the only causes of wealth which is proverbially called blind, and the especial sources of happiness. These are the things which Moses calls idols,  location 20019   
Philo, The Special Laws I, ch.4

{Ps 115:4-8; Isa 44:9-20; Heb 3:4}
It has invariably happened that the works which they have made have been, in some degree, the proofs of the character of the workmen; for who is there who, when he looks upon statues or pictures, does not at once form an idea of the statuary or painter himself? And who, when he beholds a garment, or a ship, or a house, does not in a moment conceive a notion of the weaver, or shipbuilder, or architect, who has made them?  location 20056   
Philo, The Special Laws I, ch.6

{Ps 22:28; Ps 47:7-8; Heb 3:4}
And if any one comes into a well-ordered city, in which all parts of the constitution are exceedingly well arranged and regulated, what other idea will he entertain but that this city is governed by wise and virtuous rulers? He, therefore, who comes into that which is truly the greatest of cities, namely, this world, and who beholds all the land,  location 20059   
Philo, The Special Laws I, ch.6

{Rom 1:20; Ps 19:1-6; Heb 3:4}
And the world is the most artificial and skillfully made of all works, as if it had been put together by someone who was altogether accomplished and most perfect in knowledge. It is in this way that we have received an idea of the existence of God.  location 20066   
Philo, The Special Laws I, ch.6

{Rom 9:24; Rom 3:29}
IX. And he receives all persons of a similar character and disposition, whether they were originally born so, or whether they have become so through any change of conduct,  location 20118   
Philo, The Special Laws I, ch.9

{Mt 23:15; Acts 6:5; Rom 9:24; Acts 8:27; Gal 3:28}
approving of the one body because they have not defaced their nobility of birth, and of the other because they have thought fit to alter their lives so as to come over to nobleness of conduct. And these last he calls proselytes (proseµlytous), from the fact of their having come over (proseleµlythenai) to a new and God-fearing constitution, learning to disregard the fabulous inventions of other nations, and clinging to unalloyed truth.  location 20120   
Philo, The Special Laws I, ch.9

{Ex 12:48-49; Ex 22:21; Ex 23:9; Deut 10:19; Rom 9:24; Gal 3:28; Eph 2:18-19}
not only to treat them with respect, but even with especial friendship and excessive benevolence. And is not this a reasonable recommendation? What he says is this. "Those men, who have left their country, and their friends, and their relations for the sake of virtue and holiness, ought not to be left destitute of some other cities, and houses, and friends, but there ought to be places of refuge always ready for those who come over to religion; for the most effectual allurement and the most indissoluble bond of affectionate good will is the mutual honoring of the one God."  location 20125   
Philo, The Special Laws I, ch.9

{Ex 22:21; Ex 23:9; Ex 23:19; Lev 19:33-34; Isa 56:3; Isa 56:6-7; Isa 2:2-31 Kings 8:41-43; Mic 4:1-2}
Moreover, he also enjoins his people that, after they have given the proselytes an equal share in all their laws, and privileges, and immunities, on their forsaking the pride of their fathers and forefathers, they must not give a license to their jealous language and unbridled tongues, blaspheming those beings whom the other body looks upon as gods, lest the proselytes should be exasperated at such treatment, and in return utter impious language against the true and holy God; for from ignorance of the difference between them, and by reason of their having from their infancy learnt to look upon what was false as if it had been true, and having been bred up with it, they would be likely to err.  location 20129   
Philo, The Special Laws I, ch.9

{Isa 30:30-33; Isa 66:15; Ps 2:12; Isa 10:5-6}
And there are some of the Gentiles, who, not attending to the honor due to the one God alone, deserve to be punished with extreme severity of punishment,  location 20134   
Philo, The Special Laws I, ch.9

{Lev 24:16; Isa 30:30-33; Isa 66:15; Heb 12:29; Deut 4:24}
And it is well that a charge should be given to all those who have any admiration for virtue to inflict all such punishment out of hand without any delay, not bringing them before either any judgment seat, or any council, or any bench of magistrates, but giving vent to their own disposition which hates evil and loves God, so as to chastise the impious with implacable rigour,  location 20136   
Philo, The Special Laws I, ch.9

{Num 25:1-13}
X. There is, in the history of the Law, a record of one man who ventured on this exploit of noble daring, for when he saw some men connecting themselves with foreign women, and by reason of their allurements neglecting all their national customs and laws, and practising fabulous ceremonies,  location 20141   
Philo, The Special Laws I, ch.10


{Deut 18:18; Isa 51:16; Ex 4:12; 2 Pet 1:20}
he says, that if they are truly pious they shall not be deprived of a proper knowledge of the future; but that some other prophet will appear to them on a sudden, inspired like himself, who will preach and prophesy among them, saying nothing of his own (for he who is truly possessed and inspired, even when he speaks, is unable to comprehend what he is himself saying), but that all the words that he should utter would proceed from him as if another was prompting him; for the prophets are interpreters of God, who is only using their voices as instruments, in order to explain what he chooses. [Fn. this prophecy, Deuteronomy 18:18, is always looked upon as one of the most remarkable of the early prophecies of our Saviour]    location 20176   
Philo, The Special Laws I, ch.11

{Isa 66:1; Heb 1:14; Heb 12:22-23}
XII. We ought to look upon the universal world as the highest and truest temple of God, having for its most holy place that most sacred part of the essence of all existing things, namely, the heaven; and for ornaments, the stars; and for priests, the subordinate ministers of his power, namely, the angels, incorporeal souls, not beings compounded of irrational and rational natures, such as our bodies are, but such as have the irrational parts wholly cut out, being absolutely and wholly intellectual, pure reasonings, resembling the unit.  location 20184   
Philo, The Special Laws I, ch.12

{Jn 4:21-24; Isa 66:1-2; Isa 66:18-23}
fitting that as God is one, his temple also should be one. In the next place, he does not permit those who desire to perform sacrifices in their own houses to do so, but he orders all men to rise up, even from the furthest boundaries of the earth, and to come to this temple, by which command he is at the same time testing their dispositions most severely;  location 20191   
Philo, The Special Laws I, ch.12

{Gen 12:1; Ruth 1:16}
for he who was not about to offer sacrifice in a pure and holy spirit would never endure to quit his country, and his friends, and relations, and emigrate into a distant land,  location 20194   
Philo, The Special Laws I, ch.12

{Ezek 40:17; Ps 84:10; Rev 11:2}
"All the cloisters were double, and the pillars to them belonging were twenty-five cubits in height, and supported -the cloisters. These pillars were of one entire stone each of them, and that stone was white marble; and the roofs were adorned with cedar, curiously graven. The natural magnificence, and excellent polish, and the harmony of the joints in these cloisters, afforded a prospect that was very remarkable; nor was it on the outside adorned with any work of the painter or engraver. The cloisters -(of the outmost court) were in breadth thirty cubits, while the entire compass of it was by measure six furlongs, including the tower of Antonia; those entire courts that were exposed to the air were laid with stones of all sorts" (Josephus, Jewish War 5. 5. 2).
XIII. Of this temple the outer circuit, being the most extensive both in length and width, was fortified by fortifications adorned in a most costly manner. And each of them is a double portico, built and adorned with the finest materials of wood and stone, and with abundant supplies of all kinds, and with the greatest skill of the workmen,  location 20204   
Philo, The Special Laws I, ch.13

{Heb 9:3-5; Lev 16:2}
But the inner circuits were less extensive, and the fashion of their building and adorning was more simple. And in the centre was the temple itself, beautiful beyond all possible description, as one may conjecture from what is now seen around on the outside; for what is innermost is invisible to every human creature  location 20206   
Philo, The Special Laws I, ch.13

{Ex 30:34-38; Lev 24:7}
Everything then is invisible. For he carries in a brasier full of coals and frankincense; and then, when a great smoke proceeds from it, as is natural, and when everything all around is enveloped in it, then the sight of men is clouded, and checked, and prevented from penetrating in, being wholly unable to pierce the cloud.  location 20210   
Philo, The Special Laws I, ch.13

{Law, The }
But there is no grove of plantation in the space which surrounds it, in accordance with the prohibitions of the Law, which for many reasons forbid this.  location 20215   
Philo, The Special Laws I, ch.13

{Law, The}
Secondly, because it is not proper that those things which conduce to the verdure of trees should be introduced, such as the dung of irrational animals and of men.  location 20217   
Philo, The Special Laws I, ch.13

{Rev 11:2; Ezek 40:17; Ezek 40:20}
And besides these reasons, shady places and dense thickets are places of refuge for evil doers, since by their enveloping them in darkness they give them safety and enable them, as from an ambuscade, suddenly to fall upon any whom they choose to attack. But wide spaces, open and uncovered in every direction, where there is nothing which can hinder the sight, are the most suitable for the distinct sight of all those who enter and remain in the temple.  location 20221   
Philo, The Special Laws I, ch.13

{Neh 10:35; Ex 23:19; Ex 34:26; Num 18:13; Deut 26:2}
XIV. But the temple has for its revenues not only portions of land, but also other possessions of much greater extent and importance, which will never be destroyed or diminished; for as long as the race of mankind shall last, the revenues likewise of the temple will always be preserved, being coeval in their duration with the universal world. For it is commanded that all men shall every year bring their first fruits to the temple, from twenty years old and upwards; and this contribution is called their ransom.  ... On which account they bring in the first fruits with exceeding cheerfulness, being joyful and delighted, inasmuch as simultaneously with their making the offering they are sure to find either a relaxation from slavery, or a relief from disease, and to receive in all respects a most sure freedom and safety for the future.  location 20227   
Philo, The Special Laws I, ch.14

{Prov 3:9; Neh 10:35; Ex 23:19; Ex 34:26; Num 18:13; Deut 26:2}
XIV. (cont) And since the nation [of Jews] is the most numerous of all peoples, it follows naturally that the first fruits contributed by them must also be most abundant. Accordingly there is in almost every city a storehouse for the sacred things to which it is customary for the people to come and there to deposit their first fruits, and at certain seasons there are sacred ambassadors selected on account of their virtue, who convey the offerings to the temple.  location 20230   
Philo, The Special Laws I, ch.14

{Prov 3:9; Neh 10:35; Ex 23:19; Ex 34:26; Num 18:13; Deut 26:2}
XIV. (cont) And the most eminent men of each tribe are elected to this office [of bringing the first fruits], that they may conduct the hopes of each individual safe to their destination; for in the Lawful offering of the first fruits are the hopes of the pious.  location 20233   
Philo, The Special Laws I, ch.14

{Ex 32:25-29; Num 3:5-39}
XV. Now there are twelve tribes of the nation, and one of them having been selected from the others for its excellence has received the priesthood, receiving this honor as a reward for its virtue,  location 20234   
Philo, The Special Laws I, ch.15

{Lev 21:1-24}
XVI. ... It is enjoined that the priest shall be entire and unmutilated, having no blemish on his body, no part being deficient, either naturally or through mutilation; and on the other hand, nothing having been superfluous either from his birth or having grown out subsequently from disease; his skin, also, must never have changed from leprosy, or wild lichen, or scab, or any other eruption or breaking out; all which things appear to me to be designed to be symbols of the purity of his soul.  location 20240   
Philo, The Special Laws I, ch.16

{Jn 1:1}
Now the image of God is the Word, by which all the world was made.
Philo, The Special Laws I, ch.16

{Lev 16:4; Ex 28:1-43}
And the tunic is for the sake of promptness in performing the requisite ministrations; for they are but lightly clad, only in their tunics, when they bring their victims, and the libations, and the other requisite offerings for sacrifice, being clothed so as to admit of unhesitating speed.  location 20249   
Philo, The Special Laws I, ch.16

{Ex 28:1-43}
But the high priest is commanded to wear a similar dress when he goes into the holy of holies to offer incense, because linen is not made of any animal that dies, as woollen garments are. He is also commanded to wear another robe also, having very beautiful embroidery and ornament upon it, so that it may seem to be a copy and representation of the world. And the description of the ornament is a clear proof of this;  location 20251   
Philo, The Special Laws I, ch.16

{Ex 28:1-43}
Next there was a woven garment in the form of a breastplate upon it, and this was a symbol of the heaven; for on the points of the shoulders are two emerald stones of most exceeding value, one on one side and one on the other, each perfectly round and single on each side, as emblems of the hemispheres, one of which is above the earth and the other under the earth.  location 20256
Philo, The Special Laws I, ch.16
  
{Ex 28:1-43}
Then on his chest there are twelve precious stones of different colors, arranged in four rows of three stones in each row, being fashioned so as an emblem of the zodiac. For the zodiac also consists of twelve animals, and so divides the four seasons of the year, allotting three animals to each season.  location 20258   
Philo, The Special Laws I, ch.16

{Ex 28:1-43; Jn 1:1-3}
And the whole place is very correctly called the logeum (logeion), since everything in heaven has been created and arranged in accordance with right reason (logois) and proportion; for there is absolutely nothing there which is devoid of reason. And on the logeum he embroiders two woven pieces of cloth, calling the one manifestation and the other truth.  location 20261   
Philo, The Special Laws I, ch.16

{Ps 19:1-6}
And wise men have observed, also, an innumerable quantity of other circumstances, and have recorded them, conjecturing from the heavenly bodies the advent of calm weather and of violent storms, and the fertility or barrenness of crops, and the mild or violently hot summers, and whether the winters will be severe or spring-like, whether there will be droughts or abundance of rain, whether the flocks and trees will be fruitful, or on the contrary barren, and all such matters as these. For the signs of everything on earth are engraved and firmly fixed in heaven.  location 20272   
Philo, The Special Laws I, ch.16

{Ex 28:1-43}
XVII. And besides this, golden pomegranates are attached to the lower parts of the tunic, reaching to the feet, and bells and borders embroidered with flowers. And these things are the emblems of earth and of water; the flowers are the emblems of the earth, inasmuch as it is out of it that they all rise and derive strength to bloom. And the pomegranates (the Greek for a pomegranate is rhoia, or rhoiskos, which Philo imagines to be derived from rheoµ, "to flow") as above mentioned are the emblems of water, being so named from the flowing of the stream. And the harmony, and concord, and unison of sound of the different parts of the world is betokened by the bells.  location 20276   
Philo, The Special Laws I, ch.17

{Ex 28:1-43}
There is also a third symbol contained in this sacred dress, which it is important not to pass over in silence. For the priests of other deities are accustomed to offer up prayers and sacrifices solely for their own relations, and friends, and fellow citizens. But the high priest of the Jews offers them up not only on behalf of the whole race of mankind, but also on behalf of the different parts of nature, of the earth, of water, of air, and of fire; and pours forth his prayers and thanksgivings for them all, looking upon the world (as indeed it really is) as his country, for which, therefore, he is accustomed to implore and propitiate its governor by supplications and prayers, beseeching him to give a portion of his own merciful and humane nature to the things which he has created.  location 20292   
Philo, The Special Laws I, ch.17

{Prov 20:1; Prov 23:29-30; Prov 31:4; Osa 5:22; Isa 28:7; Isa 56:12; Hos 4:11}
in short, therefore, we must look upon the use of wine to be a most unprofitable thing for all the purposes of life, inasmuch as by it the soul is weighed down, the outward senses are dimmed, and the body is enervated. For it does not leave any one of our faculties free and unembarrassed, but is a hindrance to every one of them, so as to impede its attaining that object to which it is by nature fitted.  ... On which account it probably is that it is commanded to the priest to offer up sacrifices without wine, in order to make a difference and distinction between sacred and profane things, and pure and impure things, and lawful and unlawful things.  location 20308   
Philo, The Special Laws I, ch.18

{Lev 21:7; Lev 21:13-15; 1 Tim 3:2; Titus 1:6}
XIX. But since the priest was a man before he was a priest, and since he is of necessity desirous to indulge the appetites which prompt him to seek for the connections of love, he procures for him a marriage with a pure virgin, and one who is born of pure parents, and grandfathers, and great-grandfathers, selected for their excellency with reference both to their virtue and to their noble birth. For God does not allow him even to look upon a harlot, or a profane body or soul,  location 20310   
Philo, The Special Laws I, ch.19

{Lev 21:16-23; Deut 23:18}
XIX. (cont) For it would be mere folly that some men should be excluded from the priesthood by reason of the scars which exist on their bodies from ancient wounds, which are the emblem of misfortune indeed, but not of wickedness; but that those persons who, not at all out of necessity but from their own deliberate choice, have made a market of their beauty, when at last they slowly repent, should at once after leaving their lovers become united to priests, and should come from brothels and be admitted into the sacred precincts.

{Lev 21:16-23; Deut 23:18}
XIX. (cont) For the scars and impressions of their old offences remain not the less in the souls of those who repent. On which account it is wisely and truly said in another passage, that "One may not bring the hire of a harlot into the temple" (Deuteronomy 23:18). And yet the money is not in itself liable to any reproach, except by reason of the woman who received it, and the action for which it was given to her. How then could one possibly admit those women to consort with priests whose very money is looked upon as profane and base, even though as to its material and stamp it may be good and lawful money?  location 20317   
Philo, The Special Laws I, ch.19

{Lev 21:1-15; 1 Tim 3:2; Titus 1:6}
XX. The regulations, therefore, are laid down with precision in this manner for the high priest, so that he is not allowed either to marry a widow, nor one who is left desolate after the death of the man to whom she has been espoused, nor one who has been divorced from a husband who is still alive, in order that the sacred seed may be sown for the first time in a field which is hitherto untrodden and pure, and that his offspring may have no admixture of the blood of any other house.  location 20325   
Philo, The Special Laws I, ch.20

{1 Cor 7:34; Lev 21:13; 1 Tim 3:2; Titus 1:6}
XX. (cont) may easily form their dispositions and characters in a virtuous manner. For the minds of virgins are easily attracted and drawn over to virtue, being exceedingly ready to be taught. But the woman who has had experience of another husband is very naturally less inclined to obedience and to instruction, inasmuch as she has not a soul perfectly pure, like thoroughly smooth wax, so as to receive distinctly the doctrines which are to be impressed upon it, but one which is to a certain degree rough from the impressions which have been already stamped upon it, which are difficult to be effaced, and so remain,  location 20329   
Philo, The Special Laws I, ch.20

{Lev 21:7-15; 1 Tim 3:2; Titus 1:6}
XX. (cont) Let the high priest, therefore, take a pure virgin to be his wife; I say a virgin, meaning not only one with whom no other man has even been connected, but one in connection with whom no other man has ever been named in reference to the agreement of marriage, even though her body may be pure.  location 20334   
Philo, The Special Laws I, ch.20

{Rom 7:2-3; Lev 21:7-15}
XXI. (108) But besides this, injunctions are given to the particular and inferior priests concerning their marriages, which are the very same in most points, which are given to those who have the supreme priesthood. But they are permitted with impunity to marry not only maidens but widows also; not, indeed, all widows, but those whose husbands are dead. For the Law thinks it fitting to remove all quarrels and disputes from the life of the priests. And if they had husbands living there very likely might be disputes from the jealousy which is caused by the love of men for women. But when the first husband is dead, then with him the hostility which could be felt towards the second husband dies also. (109) And even on other accounts he might have thought that the high priest ought to be of superior purity and holiness, as in other matters so also in the connection of marriage, and on this account it may have been that God only allowed the high priest to marry a virgin. But to the priests of the second rank he remitted something of the rigor of his regulations concerning the connection with women, permitting them to marry women who have made trials of other husbands    location 20343   
Philo, The Special Laws I, ch.21

{Lev 21:7-15}
XXII. And besides these commands, he also defined precisely the family of the women who might be married by the high priest, commanding him to marry not merely a woman who was a virgin, but also one who was a priestess, the daughter of a priest, that so both bridegroom and bride might be of one house,  location 20345   
Philo, The Special Laws I, ch.22

{Lev 21:1-4}
commanding them not to permit themselves to be defiled in respect of all people whatsoever, who might happen to die, and who might be connected with them through some bond of friendship, or distant relationship: but allowing them to mourn for six classes only, their fathers or their mothers, their sons of their daughters, their brothers or their sisters, provided that these last were virgins; but the high priest he absolutely forbade to mourn in any case whatever;  location 20353   
Philo, The Special Laws I, ch.22

{Lev 21:1-4; 2 Cor 6:16-18; Mt 10:37-39}
but there is no one besides the high priest himself, who is permitted to perform his duties instead of him; for which reason, he must always be kept free from all defilement, never touching any dead body, in order that, being always ready to offer up prayers and sacrifices on behalf of the whole world at suitable seasons, he may continue to fulfil the duties of his office without hindrance. And otherwise too, besides this consideration, the man who has been assigned to God, and who has become the leader of his sacred band of worshippers, ought to be disconnected with, and alienated from, all things of creation, not being so much the slave of the love of either parents, or children, or brothers, as either to omit or to delay any one of those holy actions, which it is by all means better should be done at once;  location 20358   
Philo, The Special Laws I, ch.22

{Lev 22:10}
XXIV. And let the sojourner in the priest's house, and the hire hand, be prevented from approaching the first fruits; the sojourner, because it is not every one who is a neighbor who shares a man's hearth and eats at his table; (Leviticus 22:10), for there is reason to fear that some such person may cast away what is hallowed,  location 20378   
Philo, The Special Laws I, ch.24

{Rom 13:1-5; Eph 6:1-7; Heb 13:17}
XXIV. (cont) For if in merchant vessels the sailors were to receive an equal share with the pilot of the ship, and if in ships of war the rowers and the mariners were to receive an equal share with the captain, and if in military camps the cavalry of the line were to receive an equal share with their officers, the heavy armed infantry with their colonels, and the colonels with the generals; again, if in cities the parties before the court were to be placed on the same footing with the judges, the committeemen with the ministers, and in short private individuals with the magistrates, there would be incessant troubles and seditions, and the equality in words would produce inequality in fact; for it is an unequal measure to give equal honor to persons who are unequal in rank or desert; and inequality is the root of all evil.  location 20383   
Philo, The Special Laws I, ch.24

{Lev 22:10; Heb 11:13x}
XXIV. (cont) On which account one must not give the honors of the priests to sojourners, ... for the honor does not belong to the house, but to the race.  location 20390   
Philo, The Special Laws I, ch.24

{Lev 22:10; Eph 2:11-19x; 1 Pet 2:9x}
XXV. In like manner, no one must give this sacred honor to a hired hand, as his wages, or as a recompense for his service; for sometimes he who receives it being unholy will employ it for illegitimate purposes, making the honors due to purity of birth common, and profaning all the sacred ceremonies and observances relating to the temple; on which account the Law altogether forbids any foreigner to partake in any degree of the holy things, even if he be a man of the noblest birth among the natives of the land, and irreproachable as respects both men and women, ... as if it were reasonable that the priests should be worn out with labors and toils, and nightly and daily cares, but that the rewards for such pains should be common and open to those who do nothing.  location 20398   
Philo, The Special Laws I, ch.25

{Eph 6:9; Lev 25:43; Col 4:1}
XXV. (cont) But, he proceeds, let the priest who is his master give to the slave who is born in his house, and to him who has been purchased with money, a share of meat and drink from the first fruits. In the first place, because the master is the only source of supply to the servant, and the inheritance of the master are the sacred offices of humanity, by which the slave must necessarily be supported. In the second place, because it is by all means necessary that they should not do what is to be done unwillingly; and servants, even though we may not like it, since they are always about us and living with us, preparing meat, and drink, and delicacies for their masters beforehand, and standing at their tables, and carrying away the fragments that are left, even though they may not take any openly, will at all events secretly appropriate some of the victuals, being compelled by necessity to steal, so that instead of one injury (if indeed it is an injury to their masters that they should be supported at their expense), they are compelled to add a second to it, namely, theft; in order that, like thieves, they may enjoy what has been consecrated by their masters who live irreproachably themselves; which is the most unreasonable thing possible.  location 20399   
Philo, The Special Laws I, ch.25

{Deut 26:1-15}
XXV. (cont) Thirdly, one ought to take this also into consideration, that share of the first fruits will not be neglected merely because they are distributed to the servants, through their fear of their masters; for this is sufficient to stop their mouths, preventing the arrogance of such persons from showing itself.  location 20408   
Philo, The Special Laws I, ch.25

{Lev 22:12-13}
XXVI. If, says he, the daughter of a priest, having married a man who is not a priest, becomes a widow by the death of her husband, or if she be left childless while he is still alive, let her return again to her father's house, to receive her share of the first fruits which she enjoyed when she was a virgin; (Leviticus 22:12), for in some degree and in effect she is now also a virgin, since she has neither husband nor children, and has no other refuge but her father; but if she has sons or daughters, then the mother must of necessity be classed with the children; and the sons and daughters, being ranked as of the family of their father, draw their mother also with them into his house.  location 20411   
Philo, The Special Laws I, ch.26

{Num 18:20; Deut 10:9; Ps 16:5}
XXVII. The law did not allot any share of the land to the priests, ... for the sake of two objects, both that of doing them the highest honor, since they are thus made partners in those things which are offered up by pious men, out of gratitude to God; and also in order that they might have no business about which to trouble themselves except the offices of religion, as they would have had, if they were forced to take care of their inheritance.  location 20419   
Philo, The Special Laws I, ch.27

{Num 18:8-11; Deut 18:1-5}
XXVII. (cont) And the following are the rewards and preeminent honors which he assigns to the priests; in the first place, that the necessary food for their support shall at all times be provided for them without any labor or toil of their own;  location 20422   
Philo, The Special Laws I, ch.27

{Num 18:13; Ex 23:19; Ex 34:26; Deut 26:2; Deut 18:1-5; Prov 3:9}
XXVII. (cont) and it follows of necessity, that the first fruits offered by the most populous of nations must be very plentiful, so that even the very poorest of the priests, must, in respect of his abundance of all necessary food, appear to be very wealthy.  location 20427   
Philo, The Special Laws I, ch.27

{Num 18:12-13; Ex 23:19; Ex 34:26; Deut 26:2; Prov 3:9}
XXVII. (cont) In the second place, he commands the nation also to give them the first fruits of their other possessions; a portion of wine out of each winepress; and of wheat and barley from each threshing floor.  location 20429   
Philo, The Special Laws I, ch.27

{Num 18:12-13}
XXVII. (cont) And in like manner they were to have a share of oil from all; the olive trees, and of eatable fruit from all the fruit trees, in order that they might not pass a squalid existence, having only barely enough of necessary food to support life, but that they might have sufficient for a certain degree of comfort and luxury, and so live cheerfully on abundant means,  location 20430   
Philo, The Special Laws I, ch.27

{Num 18:15; Ex 34:19-20}
XXVII. (cont) The third honor allotted to them is an assignment of all the first-born males, of all kinds of land animals which are born for the service and use of mankind;  location 20433   
Philo, The Special Laws I, ch.27

{Num 18:16-17}
XXVII. (cont) but he orders that money shall be given as a ransom for the young of other animals, such as horses, and asses and camels, and similar beasts, without disparaging their real value;  location 20436   
Philo, The Special Laws I, ch.27

{Num 18:19}
XXVII. (cont) and the supplies thus afforded them are very great; for the people of this nation breed sheep, and cattle, and flocks of all kinds above all other peoples, separating them with great care into flocks of goats, and herds of oxen, and flocks of sheep, and a vast quantity of other troops of animals of all kinds.  location 20437   
Philo, The Special Laws I, ch.27

{Ex 13:12; Num 18:15-16}
XXVII. (cont) But nevertheless, he consecrates also their own first-born male children after the fashion of other first fruits, as a sort of thanks-offering for fertility, and a number of children both existing and hoped for,  location 20444   
Philo, The Special Laws I, ch.27

{Modesty; 1 Pet 3:1-7}
XXVII. (cont) this in their minds, both husbands and wives ought to cling to modesty, and to attend to their household concerns, and to cherish unanimity, agreeing with one another, so that what is called a communion and partnership may be so in solid truth, not only in word, but likewise in deed.  location 20446   
Philo, The Special Laws I, ch.27

{Ex 13:12; Num 18:15-16}
XXVII. (cont) And with reference to the dedication of the first-born male children, in order that the parents may not be separated from their children, nor the children from their parents, he values the first fruits of them himself at a fixed price in money ordering everyone both poor and rich to contribute an equal sum, not having any reference to the ability of the contributors, nor to the vigor or beauty of the children who were born; but considering how much even a very poor man might be able to give; for since the birth of children happens equally to the most noble and to the most obscure persons of the race, he thought it just to enact that their contribution should also be equal, ... particularly to fix a sum which should be in the power of everyone to give.  location 20453   
Philo, The Special Laws I, ch.27

{Num 18:11-13; Mt 5:46-47; Mt 9:10-11; Mt 21:31}
XXVIII. (141) After this he also appointed another source of revenue of no insignificant importance for the priests, bidding them to take the first fruits of every one of the revenues of the nation namely, the first fruits of the corn, and wine, and oil, and even of the produce of all the cattle, of the flocks of sheep, and herds of oxen, and flocks of goats, and of all other animals of all kinds; and how great an abundance of these animals there must be, any one may conjecture from the vast populousness of the nation; (142) from all which circumstances it is plain thq at the Law invests the priests with the dignity and honour that belongs to kings; since he commands contributions from every description of possession to be given to them as to rulers; and they are accordingly given to them in a manner quite contrary to that in which cities usually furnish them to their rulers; for cities usually furnish them under compulsion, and with great unwillingness and lamentation, looking upon the collectors of the taxes as common enemies and destroyers, and making all kinds of different excuses at different times, and neglecting all laws and ordinances, and with all this jumbling and evasion do they contribute the taxes and payments which are levied on them.  location 20458   
Philo, The Special Laws I, ch.28

{Num 18:21}
XXVIII. (cont) But the men of this nation contribute their payments to the priests with joy and cheerfulness, anticipating the collectors, and cutting short the time allowed for making the contributions, and thinking that they are themselves receiving rather than giving; and so with words of blessing and thankfulness, they all, both men and women, bring their offerings at each of the seasons of the year, with a spontaneous cheerfulness, and readiness, and zeal, beyond all description.  location 20463   
Philo, The Special Laws I, ch.28

{Lev 10:14-15; Ex 29:28; Num 18:21}
XXIX. (145) And these things are assigned to the priests from the possessions of each individual, but there are also often especial revenues set apart for them exceedingly suitable for the priests, which are derived from the sacrifices which are offered up; for it is commanded that two portions from two limbs of every victim shall be given to the priests, the arm from the limb on the right side, and the fat from the chest; for the one is a symbol of strength and manly vigour, and of every lawful action in giving, and taking, and acting: and the other is an emblem of human gentleness as far as the angry passions are concerned; location 20467   
Philo, The Special Laws I, ch.29

{Lev 10:14-15; Ex 29:28}
XXIX. (cont) But from the victims which are sacrificed away from the altar, in order to be eaten, it is commanded that three portions should be given to the priest,  location 20473   
Philo, The Special Laws I, ch.29

{Lev 7:8}
XXX. (cont) And beyond all these things he also orders that the priests who minister the offering of the sacrifices, shall receive the skins of the whole burnt offerings (and they amount to an unspeakable number, this being no slight gift, but one of the most exceeding value and importance), from which circumstances it is plain, that although he has not given to the priesthood a portion of land as its inheritance, in the same manner that he has to others, he has yet assigned to them a more honorable and more untroubled share than any other tribe,  location 20488   
Philo, The Special Laws I, ch.30

{Ex 34:26; Deut 26:10-13}
XXX. (cont) he commands that the first fruits should first of all be carried into the temple, and then orders that the priests shall take them out of the temple; for it was suitable to the nature of God, that those who had received kindness in all the circumstances of life, should bring the first fruits as thank-offering, and then that he, as a being who was in want of nothing, should with all dignity and honor bestow them on the servants and ministers who attend on the service of the temple; for to appear to receive these things not from men, but from the great Benefactor of all men, appears to be receiving a gift which has in it no alloy of sadness.  location 20493   
Philo, The Special Laws I, ch.30

{Deut 26:10-13}
XXXI. Since, then, these honors are put forth for them, if any of the priests are in any difficulty while living virtuously and irreproachably, they are at once accusers of us as disregarding the Law, even though they may not utter a word.  location 20498   
Philo, The Special Laws I, ch.31

{Deut 26:10-13}
XXXI. (cont) For if we were to obey the commands which we have received, and if we were to take care to give the first fruits as we are commanded, the priests would not only have abundance of all necessary things, but would also be filled with all kinds of supplies calculated for enabling them to live in refinement and luxury.  location 20499   
Philo, The Special Laws I, ch.31

{Deut 26:10-13}
XXXI. (cont) But the neglect of some persons (for it is not safe to blame everyone) is the cause of poverty to those who have been dedicated to God [i.e., Levites and priests], and, if one must tell the truth, to the men themselves also.  location 20504   
Philo, The Special Laws I, ch.31

{Deut 26:10-13}
XXXII. Having given all these supplies and revenues to the priests, he did not neglect those either who were in the second rank of the priesthood; and these are the keepers of the temple, of whom some are placed at the doors, at the very entrance of the temple, as door-keepers; and others are within, in the vestibule of the temple, in order that no one who ought not to do so might enter it, either deliberately or by accident.  location 20507   
Philo, The Special Laws I, ch.32

{Deut 26:10-13; Num 18:21; Num 18:24}
XXXII. (cont) Others, again, stand all around, having had the times of their watches assigned to them by lot, so as to watch by turns night and day, some being day watchmen and others night watchmen. Others, again, had charge of the porticoes and of the courts in the open air, and carried out all the rubbish, taking care of the cleanliness of the temple, and the tenths were assigned as the wages of all these men; for these tenths are the share of the keepers of the temple.  location 20510   
Philo, The Special Laws I, ch.32

{Num 18:26-32}
XXXII. (cont) At all events the Law did not permit those who received them to make use of them, until they had again offered up as first fruits other tenths as if from their own private property, and before they had given these to the priests of the superior rank, for then it permitted them to enjoy them,  location 20513   
Philo, The Special Laws I, ch.32

{Num 35:10-34}
XXXII. (cont) cities of refuge for those who had committed unintentional murder. For as it was not consistent with holiness for one who had by any means whatever become the cause of death to any human being to come within the sacred precincts, using the temple as a place of refuge and as an asylum, Moses gave a sort of inferior sanctity to the cities above mentioned, allowing them to give great security, by reason of the privileges and honors conferred upon the inhabitants,  location 20518   
Philo, The Special Laws I, ch.32

{Num 35:28}
XXXII. (cont) And the limit of his banishment shall be the life of the high priest; and when he is dead, he shall be pardoned and return to his own city. Moses, having promulgated these and similar laws about the priests, proceeds to enact others concerning animals, as to what beasts are suitable for sacrifice.  location 20528   
Philo, The Special Laws I, ch.32

{Lev 14:30}
XXXIII. (162) Of the creatures which are fit to be offered as sacrifices, some are land animals, and some are such as fly through the air. Passing over, therefore, the infinite varieties of birds, God chose only two classes out of them all, the turtledove and the pigeon; because the pigeon is by nature the most gentle of all those birds which are domesticated and gregarious, and the turtle-dove the most gentle of those which love solitude.  location 20533   
Philo, The Special Laws I, ch.33

{Lev 1:1-3}
XXXIII. (cont) Also, passing over the innumerable troops of land animals, whose very numbers it is not easy to ascertain, he selected these especially as the best-the oxen, and sheep, and goats; for these are the most gentle and the most manageable of all animals. At all events, great herds of oxen, and numerous flocks of goats and sheep, are easily driven by any one, not merely by any man, but by any little child, when they go forth to pasture,  ... And of this gentleness, there are many other proofs, and the most evident are these: that they all feed on herbage, and that no one of them is carnivorous, and that they have neither crooked talons, nor any projecting tusks or teeth whatever;  ... besides these facts, they are of all animals the most useful to man. Rams are the most useful for the necessary covering of the body; oxen, for plowing the ground and preparing the arable land for seed, and for the growth of the crops that shall hereafter come to be threshed out, in order that men may partake of and enjoy food; and the hair and fleeces of goats, where one is woven, or the other sewn together, make movable tents for travelers, and especially for men engaged in military expeditions,  location 20541   
Philo, The Special Laws I, ch.33

{Lev 22:19-25; Mal 1:8}
XXXIV. So great is the caution used with respect not only to those who offer the sacrifices, but also to the victims which are offered, that the most eminent of the priests are carefully selected to examine whether they have any blemishes or not, and scrutinize them from head to foot, inspecting not only those parts which are easily visible, but all those which are more out of sight, such as the belly and the thighs, lest any slight imperfection should escape notice. And the accuracy and minuteness of the investigation is directed not so much on account of the victims themselves, as in order that those who offer them should be irreproachable;  location 20546   
Philo, The Special Laws I, ch.34

{ Lev 22:19-25; Ps 51:17; 2 Pet 3:14}
for God designed to teach the Jews by these figures, whenever they went up to the altars, when there to pray or to give thanks, never to bring with them any weakness or evil passion in their soul, but to endeavor to make it wholly and entirely bright and clean, without any blemish, so that God might not turn away with aversion from the sight of it.  location 20550   
Philo, The Special Laws I, ch.34

{Lev 4:1-35}
XXXV. And since, of the sacrifices to be offered, some are on behalf of the whole nation, and indeed, if one should tell the real truth, in behalf of all mankind, while others are only in behalf of each individual who has chosen to offer them;  location 20553   
Philo, The Special Laws I, ch.35

{Num 28:3-4}
XXXV. (cont) Accordingly, it is commanded that every day the priests should offer up two lambs, one at the dawn of day, and the other in the evening; each of them being a sacrifice of thanksgiving; the one for the kindnesses which have been bestowed during the day, and the other for the mercies which have been vouchsafed in the night,  location 20557   
Philo, The Special Laws I, ch.35

{Gen 2:2-3; Ex 20:8}
XXXV. (cont) inasmuch as he looks upon the seventh day as equal in dignity to eternity, since he has recorded it as being the birthday of the whole world.  location 20561   
Philo, The Special Laws I, ch.35

{Hermeneutics; Lev 1:5; Ex 30:7-8; 2 Chr 13:11; Gen 1:26; Gen 2:7}
XXXV. (cont) the sacrifices of blood display our gratitude for ourselves as being composed of blood, but the offerings of incense show our thankfulness for the dominant part within us, our rational spirit, which was fashioned after the archetypal model of the divine image.  location 20564   
Philo, The Special Laws I, ch.35

{Lev 24:5-9; Ex 25:30}
XXXV. (cont) And loaves are placed on the seventh day on the sacred table, being equal in number to the months of the year, twelve loaves, arranged in two rows of six each, in accordance with the arrangement of the equinoxes; for there are two equinoxes every year, the vernal and the autumnal, which are each reckoned by periods of six months.  location 20566   
Philo, The Special Laws I, ch.35

{Lev 24:9; Mt 6:11}
XXXV. (cont) For, to a lover of wisdom, a loaf is a sufficient nourishment, keeping the bodies free from disease, and the intellect sound, and healthy, and sober. But high seasonings, and cheesecakes, and sweetmeats, and all the other delicacies which the superfluous skill of confectioners and cooks concoct to cajole the illiterate, and unphilosophical, and most slavish of all the outward senses, namely, taste, which is never influenced by any noble sight, or by any perceptible lesson, but only by desire to indulge the appetites of the miserable belly, constantly engenders incurable diseases both in the body and the mind.  location 20573   
Philo, The Special Laws I, ch.35

{Hermeneutics; Lev 24:7; Mt 5:13; Mt 9:50}
XXXV. (cont) And with the loaves there is also placed on the table frankincense and salt. The one as a symbol that there is no sweetmeat more fragrant and wholesome than economy and temperance, if wisdom is to be the judge; while salt is an emblem of the duration of all things (for salt preserves everything over which it is sprinkled), and also of sufficient seasoning.  location 20578   
Philo, The Special Laws I, ch.35

{1 Pet 4:3-4; Phil 3:19}
XXXV. (cont) I know that those men who devote themselves wholly to drinking parties and banquets, and who care only for costly entertainments, will make a mock at these things and turn them into ridicule, miserable slaves as they are of birds, and fishes, and meat, and all such nonsense as that, and not being able to taste of true freedom, not even in a dream.  location 20580  
 Philo, The Special Laws I, ch.35

{Lev 1:1-17; Lev 2:1-16; Lev 3:1-17; Lev 4:1-35}
XXXVI. After the Lawgiver has given these commands with reference to these subjects, he begins to distinguish between the different kinds of sacrifices, and he divides the victims into three classes. The most important of which he makes a whole burnt offering; the next an offering for preservation; the last, a sin-offering.  location 20585   
Philo, The Special Laws I, ch.36

{Lev 22:29; Lev 7:11-21}
enjoining that what is offered to the all-perfect and absolute God must be itself entire and perfect, having no taint of mortal selfishness in it. But that sacrifice which is offered for the sake of men, since its appearance admits of distinction, the Law has distinguished also, appointing it to be a sacrifice for the participation in blessings which mankind has enjoined, and calling it a thank-offering for their preservation.  location 20595   
Philo, The Special Laws I, ch.36

{Lev 4:1-35}
And for the deliverance from evils it has allotted the sacrifice called a sin-offering, so that these are very appropriately their sacrifices for these causes; the whole burnt-offering being sacrificed for God himself alone, who must be honored for his own sake, and not for that of any other being or thing; and the others for our sake; the thank-offering for our preservation, for the safety and amelioration of human affairs; and the sin-offering for the cure of those offences which the soul has committed.  location 20598   
Philo, The Special Laws I, ch.36

{Hermeneutics; Lev 1:3; Lev 1:10}
And the words employed are visible symbols of what is invisible and uncertain. Now the victim which is to be sacrificed as a whole burnt offering must be a male, because a male is both more akin to domination than a female and more nearly related to the efficient cause; for the female is imperfect, subject, seen more as the passive than as the active partner. And since the elements of which our soul consists are two in number, the rational and the irrational part, the rational part belongs to the male sex, being the inheritance of intellect and reason; but the irrational part belongs to the sex of woman, which is the lot also of the outward senses. And the mind is in every respect superior to the outward sense, as the man is to the woman; who, when he is without blemish and purified with the proper purifications, namely, the perfect virtues, is himself the most holy sacrifice, being wholly and in all respects pleasing to God.  location 20609   
Philo, The Special Laws I, ch.36

{Ex 23:8; Ps 15:5; Deut 16:19; Lev 4:29}
and, in the second place, that his life shall consist of most virtuous actions, so that, in conjunction with the imposition of hands, the man may speak freely out of his clean conscience, and may say, "These hands have never received any gift as a bribe to commit an unjust action, nor any division of what has been obtained by rapine or by covetousness, nor have they shed innocent blood. nor have they wrought mutilation, nor works of insolence, nor acts of violence, nor have they inflicted any wounds; nor, in fact, have they performed any action whatever which is liable to accusation or to reproach, but have been ministers in everything which is honorable and advantageous, and which is honored by wisdom, or by the Laws, or by honorable and virtuous men."  location 20619   
Philo, The Special Laws I, ch.36

{Lev 4:7; Gen 9:4}
XXXVIII. And the blood is poured out in a circle all around the altar, because a circle is the most complete of all figures, ... the blood is the libation of the life.  location 20626   
Philo, The Special Laws I, ch.38

{Lev 1:9; Phil 3:19}
And it is commanded that the belly and the feet shall be washed, which command is a figurative and very expressive one; for, by the belly it is figuratively meant to be signified that it is desirable that the appetites shall be purified, which are full of stains, and intoxication, and drunkenness,  location 20628   
Philo, The Special Laws I, ch.38

{Lev 1:9; Col 3:2}
And by the command that the feet of the victim should be washed, it is figuratively shown that we must no longer walk upon the earth, but soar aloft and traverse the air. For the soul of the man who is devoted to God, being eager for truth, springs upward and mounts from earth to heaven; and, being borne on wings, traverses the expanse of the air, being eager to be classed with and to move in concert with the sun, and moon, and all the rest of the most sacred and most harmonious company of the stars, under the immediate command and government of God,  location 20630   
Philo, The Special Laws I, ch.38

{Attributes of God; Gen 1:1; 1 Pet 1:2}
for God is both all good, and is also the maker and creator of the universe; and he also created it having a foreknowledge of what would take place, and being its preserver and most blessed benefactor, full of every kind of happiness;  location 20642   
Philo, The Special Laws I, ch.38

{Ps 136:1-9}
When you wish to give thanks to God with your mind, and to assert your gratitude for the creation of the world, give him thanks for the creation of it as a whole, and of all its separate parts in their integrity, as if for the limbs of a most perfect animal; and by the parts I mean, for instance, the heaven, and the sun, and the moon, and the fixed stars; and secondly the earth, and the animals, and plants which spring from it; and next the seas and rivers, whether naturally springing from the ground or swollen by rain as winter torrents, and all the things in them: and lastly, the air and all the changes that take place in it; for winter, and summer, and spring, and autumn, being the seasons of the year, and being all of great service to mankind,  location 20645   
Philo, The Special Laws I, ch.38

{Lev 7:11-21; 1 Thess 5:18; 3 Jn 1:2}
And if ever you give thanks for men and their fortunes, do not do so only for the race taken generally, but you shall give thanks also for the species and most important parts of the race, such as men and women, Greeks and barbarians, men on the continent, and those who have their habitation in the islands; and if you are giving thanks for one individual, do not divide your thankfulness in expression into gratitude for minute trifles and inconsiderable matters, but take in your view the most comprehensive circumstances, first of all, his body and his soul, of which he consists, and then his speech, and his mind, and his outward senses; for such gratitude cannot of itself be unworthy of being listened to by God, when uttered, for each of these particulars.  location 20651   
Philo, The Special Laws I, ch.38

{Lev 7:11 LXX}
[*What is the sacrifice of "preservation"?? In it you asked what was the "sacrifice of preservation"?  The expression may not appear in the Masoretic text. In the LXX, Lev. 7:11 speaks of the "sacrifice of soterion"  Yonge translates this as the "sacrifice of preservation." The NETS translation calls it the "sacrifice of deliverance."  For some reason, the Orthodox Study Bible follows the NKJV here and translates it as "sacrifice of peace offering."]
We must now proceed in due order to consider that offering which is called the sacrifice for preservation;  location 20657
 Philo, The Special Laws I, ch.38

{Lev 3:4; Lev 8:16; Lev 9:10}  
when it is slain, these three parts are especially selected for the altar, the fat, and the lobe of the liver, and the two kidneys; and all the other parts are left to make a feast for the one making the sacrifice; and we must consider with great accuracy the reason why these portions of the entrails are in this case looked upon as sacred, and not pass this point by carelessly. ... for it would be folly to suppose that sacrifices were not to procure a forgetfulness of offences, but were to act as a reminder of them. ... the fat is brought because it is the richest part, and that which guards the entrails; for it envelops them and makes them to flourish,  ... And the kidneys are commanded to be selected on account of the adjacent parts and the organs of generation, which they, as they dwell near them, ... 
for they are channels resembling blood, by which that part of the purification of the superfluities of the body which is moist is separated from the body;  location 20677   
Philo, The Special Laws I, ch.38

{Lev 3:4; Lev 8:16; Lev 9:10}
And the lobe of the liver is the first fruit of the most important of the entrails, by means of which the food is digested, and being conveyed into the stomach ... And the liver has a twofold power, a secretive one, and also a power of making blood. Now the secretive power secretes everything which is hard and difficult to be digested,  location 20684   
Philo, The Special Laws I, ch.38

{Lev 7:17-18 MT; Lev 7:7-8 LXX}
XL. And there are two days only during which God permits the nation to make use of the sacrifice for preservation, enjoining them to carve nothing of it on the third day,  location 20695   
Philo, The Special Laws I, ch.40

{Lev 1:8-9; Lev 2:2; Rom 12:1}
XL. (cont) for the sacrifice when once placed on the altar, is no longer the property of the person who has offered it, but belongs to that Being to whom the victim is sacrificed, who, being a beneficent and bounteous God, makes the whole company of those who offer the sacrifice, ... admonishing them not to look upon it as their own feast, for they are but stewards of the feast, and not the entertainers;  location 20701   
Philo, The Special Laws I, ch.40

{Lev 7:11; 1 Thess 5:23}
XL. (cont) Lastly, this command was given because it so happens that the sacrifice for preservation is offered up for two things, the soul and the body, ... so that in the first day we should, together with our eating of the food, receive a recollection of the salvation of our souls; and on the second day be reminded of the sound health of our bodies.  location 20706   
Philo, The Special Laws I, ch.40

{Isa 1:11; Mal 1:6-8; Isa 66:3; Ps 50:8-13}
XL. (cont) and he declares that the man who has merely tasted of it is blamable, saying to him, "Though thinking that you were sacrificing, O foolish man, you have not sacrificed; I have not accepted the unholy, unconsecrated, profane, unclean meats which you have roasted, O gluttonous man; never, even in a dream, having a proper idea of sacrifice."  location 20710   
Philo, The Special Laws I, ch.40

{Lev 7:12; Heb 13:15; Lev 19:1}
XLI. To this species of sacrifice for preservation that other sacrifice also belongs, which is called the sacrifice of praise, and which rests on the following principle (Leviticus 19:1). The man who has never fallen into any unexpected disaster whatever, neither as to his body nor as to his external circumstances, but who has passed a tranquil and peaceful life, living in happiness and prosperity, being free from all calamity and all mishap, steering through the long voyage of life in calmness and serenity of circumstances, good fortune always blowing upon the stern of his vessel, is, of necessity, bound to requite God, who has been the pilot of his voyage, who has bestowed upon him untroubled salvation and unalloyed benefits, and, in short, all sorts of blessings unmingled with any evil, with hymns, and songs, an prayers, and also with sacrifices, and all other imaginable tokens of gratitude in a holy manner; all which things taken together have received the one comprehensive name of praise.  location 20712   
Philo, The Special Laws I, ch.41

{Lev 4:1-35; Lev 5:1-4}
XLII. We must now proceed, in due order, to consider the third sacrifice, which is called the sin-offering.  location 20722   
Philo, The Special Laws I, ch.42

{Lev 4:1-35}
XLII. (cont) The sins therefore of the high priest, and of the whole nation, are atoned for by animals of equal value, for the priest is commanded to offer up a calf for each. The sins of the ruler are atoned for by an inferior animal, but still a male, for a kid is the appointed victim. The sins of the private individual by a victim of an inferior species, for it is a female, not a male, a she-goat, that is sacrificed; (229) for it was fitting that a ruler should be ranked above a private individual, even in his performance of sacred ceremonies also: but the nation is superior to the ruler, since the whole must, at all times, be superior to the part. But the high priest is accounted worthy of the same honour as the whole nation, in respect of purification and of entreating a forgiveness of his sins from the merciful power of God. And he receives an equality of honour, not so much as it appears for his own sake, as because he is a servant of the nation, offering up a common thank-offering for them all in his most sacred prayers and most holy sacrifices.   location 20727   
Philo, The Special Laws I, ch.42

{Lev 4:1-12; 1 Pet 1:15-16; Heb 7:26; Heb 9:7}
XLII. (cont) And the commandment given respecting these matters is one of great dignity and admirable solemnity. "If," says the Law, "the high priest have sinned unintentionally," and then it adds, "so that the people has sinned too," all but affirming in express words that the true high priest, not the one incorrectly called so, has no participation in sin; and if ever he stumble, this will happen to him, not for his own sake, but for the common errors of the nation,  location 20734   
Philo, The Special Laws I, ch.42

{Lev 5:15-16; Heb 9:7}
XLIII. (234) But since, of offenses some are committed against men, and some against holy and sacred things; he has hitherto been speaking with reference to those which are unintentionally committed against men; but for the purification of such as have been committed against sacred things he commands a ram to be offered up, after the offender has first paid the value of the thing to which the offence related, adding one fifth to the exact value. 
Philo, The Special Laws I, ch.43

{Lev 7:1-5; Lev 6:9-11}
XLIII. (cont) And we must take notice that the parts of the victim slain as a sin-offering which are placed upon the altar, are the same as those which are taken from the sacrifice for preservation, namely the lobe of the liver, and the fat, and the kidneys; for in a manner we may speak also of the man who repents as being preserved, since he is cured of a disease of the soul, which is worse than the diseases of the body; (240) but the other parts of the animal are assigned to be eaten in a different manner; and the difference consists in three things; in the place, and time, and in those who receive it. (Leviticus 6:9). ... Now the place is the temple; the time is one day instead of two; and the persons who partake of it are the priests, and the male servants of the priests, but not the men who offer the sacrifice.  location 20770   
Philo, The Special Laws I, ch.43

{Lev 6:9; Lev 7:15}
XLIV. And the Law orders the priests to feast on what is offered in the sacrifice for many reasons; first of all, that by this command it may do honor to him who has offered the sacrifice, for the dignity of those who eat of the feast is an honor to those who furnish it; secondly, that they may believe the more firmly that those men who feel repentance for their sins do really have God propitious to them, for he would never have invited his servants and ministers to a participation in such a banquet, if his forgiveness of those who provided it had not been complete; and thirdly, because it is not lawful for any one of the priests to bear a part in the sacred ceremonies who is not perfect, for they are rejected for the slightest blemish.  ... And it is for this reason that the victim sacrificed as a sin-offering is consumed in one day, because men ought to delay to sin, being always slow and reluctant to approach it, but to exert all possible haste and promptness in doing well.  location 20782   
Philo, The Special Laws I, ch.44

{Num 6:2-21}
XLV. Having given these commandments about every description of sacrifice in its turn, namely, about the burnt offering, and the sacrifice for preservation, and the sin-offering, he adds another kind of offering common to all the three, in order to show that they are friendly and connected with one another; and this combination of them all is called the great vow [i.e. Nazarite]; and why it received this appellation we must now proceed to say.  location 20792   
Philo, The Special Laws I, ch.45

{Num 6:2-21; Rom 12:1}
XLV. (cont) and when they have no longer any materials left in which they can display their piety, they then consecrate and offer up themselves, displaying an unspeakable holiness, and a most superabundant excess of a God-loving disposition, on which account such a dedication is fitly called the great vow; for every man is his own greatest and most valuable possession, and this even he now gives up and abandons.  location 20797   
Philo, The Special Laws I, ch.45

{Num 6:2-21; Lev 10:9}
XLV. (cont) And when a man has vowed this vow the Law gives him the following command; first of all, to touch no unmixed wine, nor any wine that is made of the grape, nor to drink any other strong drink whatever, to the destruction of his reason, considering that during this period his reason also is dedicated to God; for all which could tend to drunkenness is forbidden to those of the priests who are employed in the sacred ministrations, they being commanded to quench their thirst with water; in the second place they are commanded not to show their heads, giving thus a visible sign to all who see them that they are not debasing the pure coinage of their vow; thirdly, they are commanded to keep their body pure and undefiled, so as not even to approach their parents if they are dead, nor their brothers;  location 20800   
Philo, The Special Laws I, ch.45

{Num 6:13-21; Rom 3:23; Lev 7:11 LXX}
XLVI. But when the appointed time for their being released (Numbers 6:14), from this vow has arrived, the Law then commands the man who has dedicated himself to bring three animals to procure his release from his vow, a male lamb, and a female lamb, and a ram; the one for a burnt offering, the second for a sin-offering, and the ram as a sacrifice for preservation; for in some sense the man who has made such a vow resembles all these things.  ... He resembles the sacrifice of the entire burnt offering, because he is dedicating to his preserver not only a portion of the first fruits of other things, but also of his own self. And he resembles the sin-offering, inasmuch as he is a man; for there is no one born, however perfect he may be, who can wholly avoid the commission of sin. He resembles also the offering for preservation, inasmuch as he has recorded that God the Savior is the cause of his preservation, and does not ascribe it to any physician or to any power of his;  location 20810   
Philo, The Special Laws I, ch.46

{Lev 7:11 LXX}
XLVI. (cont) Medicine does not benefit all persons, nor does it always benefit the same persons; but there are times even when it does them great injury, since its power depends on different things, both on the thing itself and also on those persons who use it.  location 20815   
Philo, The Special Laws I, ch.46

{Num 6:18; Lev 6:12-13}
XLVI. (cont) But since the man has begun to offer himself as his first fruits, and since it is not lawful for the sacred altar to be polluted with human blood, but yet it was by all means necessary that a portion should be consecrated, he has taken care to take a portion, which, being taken, should cause neither pain nor defilement; for he has cut off (Numbers 6:18), the hair of the head, the superfluities of the natural body, as if they were the superfluous branches of a tree, and he has committed them to the fire on which the meat of the sacrifice offered for preservation will be suitably prepared, (Leviticus 6:13) in order that some portion of the man who has made the vow, which it is not lawful to place upon the altar, may still at all events be combined with the sacrifice, burning the fuel of the sacred flame.  location 20821   
Philo, The Special Laws I, ch.46

{Lev 6:20-21; Heb 7:27}
XLVII. (255) These sacred fires are common to all the rest of the people. But it was fitting that the priests also should offer up something on the altar as first fruits, not thinking that the services and sacred ministrations to which they have been appointed have secured them an exemption from such duties. And the first fruits suitable for the priests to offer do not come from anything containing blood, but from the purest portion of human food; for the fine wheat flour is their continual offering; a tenth part of a sacred measure every day; one half of which is offered up in the morning, and one half in the evening, having been soaked in oil, so that no portion of it can be left for food;  location 20827   
Philo, The Special Laws I, ch.47

{Lev 6:22-23}
XLVII. (cont) all the sacrifices of the priests shall be wholly burnt, and that no portion of them shall be allotted for food.  location 20832   
Philo, The Special Laws I, ch.47

{Lev 22:19-25; Lev 21:18-21; Ps 40:6: Ps 51:16; Prov 15:8; Prov 21:3; Prov 21:27; 1 Pet 1:19}
XLVIII. (257) The law chooses that a person who brings a sacrifice shall be pure, both in body and soul; --pure in soul from all passions, and diseases, and vices, which can be displayed either in word or deed; and pure in body from all such things as a body is usually defiled by. (258) ... What, then, is the mode of purifying the soul? "Look," says the Law, "take care that the victim which thou bringest to the altar is perfect, wholly without participation in any kind of blemish, selected from many on account of its excellence
location 21160
Philo, The Special Laws I, ch.48

{Num 19:1-10; Mt 3:11}
XLIX. (262) We must consider what great prudence and philosophical wisdom is displayed in this law; for nearly all other persons are besprinkled with pure water, generally in the sea, some in rivers, and others again in vessels of water which they draw from fountains. But Moses, having previously prepared ashes which had been left from the sacred fire (and in what manner shall be explained hereafter), appointed that it should be right to take some of them and to put them in a vessel, and then to pour water upon them, and then, dipping some branches of hyssop in the mixture of ashes and water, to sprinkle it over those who were to be purified. (263) And the cause of this proceeding may very probably be said to be this:--The lawgiver's intention is that those who approach the service of the living God should first of all know themselves and their own essence. For how can the man who does not know himself ever comprehend the supreme and all-excelling power of God? (264) Therefore, our bodily essence is earth and water, of which he reminds us by this purification, conceiving that this result--namely, to know one's self, and to know also of what one is composed, of what utterly valueless substances mere ashes and water are--is of itself the most beneficial purification. (265) For when a man is aware of this he will at once reject all vain and treacherous conceit, and, discarding haughtiness and pride, he will seek to become pleasing to God
Philo, The Special Laws I, ch.49

{Num 19:1-10}
L. (267) But now it is necessary to fulfil our promise and to explain the peculiar propriety involved in this use of ashes. For they are not merely the ashes of wood which has been consumed by fire, but also of an animal particularly suited for this kind of purification. For the Law orders that a red heifer, which has never been brought under the yoke, shall be sacrificed outside of the city, and that the high priest, taking some of the blood, shall seven times sprinkle with it all the things in front of the temple, and then shall burn the whole animal, with its hide and flesh, and with the belly full of all the entrails. And when the flame begins to pour down, then it commands that these three things shall be thrown into the middle of it, a stick of cedar, a stick of hyssop, and a bunch of saffron; and then, when the fire is wholly extinguished, it commands that some man who is clean shall collect the ashes, and shall again place them outside of the city in some open place. (269) And what figurative meanings he conceals under these orders as symbols, we have accurately explained in another treatise,
Philo, The Special Laws I, ch.50

{Ex 25:8-40; Ex 27:1-19; Prov 15:8; Prov 21:3; Prov 21:27}
LI. (273) And that this statement is true, and not mine but that of nature, is testified to a certain degree by the evident nature of the thing itself, which affords a manifest proof which none can deny who do not cleave to credulity out of a contentious disposition. It is testified also by the Law which commands two altars to be prepared, differing both as to the materials of which they are made, as to the places in which they are erected, and as to the purposes to which they are applied; (274) for one is made of stones, carefully selected so to fit one another, and unhewn, and it is erected in the open air, near the steps of the temple, and it is for the purpose of sacrificing victims which contain blood in them. And the other is made of gold, and is erected in the inner part of the temple, within the first veil, and may not be seen by any other human being except those of the priests who keep themselves pure, and it is for the purpose of offering incense upon; (275) from which it is plain that God looks upon even the smallest offering of frankincense by a holy man as more valuable than ten thousand beasts which may be sacrificed by one who is not thoroughly virtuous.
Philo, The Special Laws I, ch.51

{Deut 23:18; Prov 15:8; Prov 21:3; Prov 21:27; 1 Cor 6:9-10}
LI. (cont)  This injunction also is very admirably and properly set down in the sacred tablets of the Law, that the wages of a harlot are not to be received into the temple, and inasmuch as she has earned them by selling her beauty, having chosen a most infamous life for the sake of shameful gain; (281) but if the gifts which proceed from a woman who has lived as a concubine are unholy, how can those be different which proceed from a soul which is defiled in the same manner, which has voluntarily abandoned itself to shame and to the lowest infamy, to drunkenness and gluttony, and covetousness and ambition, and love of pleasure, and to innumerable other kinds of passions, and diseases, and wickednesses? For what time can be long enough to efface those defilements, I indeed do not know. (282) location 21161   
Philo, The Special Laws I, ch.51

{Deut 23:18; Mt 21:31}
LI. (cont) Very often in truth time has put an end to the occupation of a harlot, since, when women have outlived their beauty, no one any longer approaches them, their prime having withered away like that of some flowers;  ... and what length of time can ever transform the harlotry of the soul which from its youth has been trained in early and habitual incontinence, so as to bring it over to good order? No time could do this, but God alone, to whom all things are possible, even those which among us are impossible.  location 21167   
Philo, The Special Laws I, ch.51

{Prov 15:8; Prov 21:3; Ps 51:16-17; 2 Pet 3:14}
LI. (cont)  Accordingly, the man who is about to offer a sacrifice ought to examine and see, not whether the victim is without blemish, but whether his mind is sound, and entire, and perfect. Let him likewise investigate the causes for which he is about to offer the sacrifice; for it must be as an expression of thankfulness for kindnesses which have been shown to him, or else of supplication for the permanence of his present blessings, or for the acquisition of some future good, or else to avert some evil either present or expected;  location 21169   
Philo, The Special Laws I, ch.51

{Lev 22:29; 1 Pet 3:10-12; Ps 34:12-16}
LI. (cont)  for if he is giving thanks for benefits conferred upon him, he must take care not to behave like an ungrateful man, becoming wicked, for the benefits are conferred on a virtuous man;  ... or if he is asking to escape from evils, let him not commit actions deserving of correction and punishment.  location 21176   
Philo, The Special Laws I, ch.51

{Cosmetics; Prov 7:6-27; 1 Tim 2:9; 1 Pet 3:3}
LI. (cont)  Accordingly, the one comes to us luxuriously dressed in the guise of a harlot and prostitute, with mincing steps, rolling her eyes about with excessive licentiousness and desire, by which baits she entraps the souls of the young, looking about with a mixture of boldness and impudence, holding up her head, and raising herself above her natural height, fawning and giggling, having the hair of her head dressed with most superfluous elaborateness, having her eyes penciled, her eyebrows covered over, using incessant warm baths, painted with a fictitious color, exquisitely dressed with costly garments, richly embroidered, adorned with armlets, and bracelets, and necklaces, and all other ornaments which can be made of gold, and precious stones, and all kinds of female decorations; loosely girdled, breathing of most fragrant perfumes, thinking the whole market her home;  ... out of the scarcity of any genuine beauty, pursuing an illegitimate elegance.  location 21186   
Philo, The Special Laws I, ch.51

{Modesty; 1 Tim 2:9-10; 1 Pet 3:3-4}
LI. (cont)  she in her turn came forward, and appeared on a sudden, displaying all the qualities of a native, free-born, and lady-like woman, such as a firm step, a very gentle look, the native color of modesty and nature without any alloy or disguise, an honest disposition, a genuine and sincere way of life, a plain, honest opinion, a language removed from all insincerity, the truest possible image of a sound and honest heart, a disposition averse to pretense, a quiet unobtrusive gait, a moderate style of dress, and the ornaments of prudence and virtue, more precious than any gold. And she was attended by piety, and holiness, and truth, and right, and purity, and an honest regard for an oath, and justice, and equality, and adherence to one's engagements and communion, and prudent silence, and temperance, and orderliness, and meekness,  location 21212   
Philo, The Special Laws I, ch.51

{Ps 15:1-5}
LI. (cont)  contentment, and good-temper, and modesty, and an absence of curiosity about the concerns of others, and manly courage, and a noble disposition and wisdom in counsel, and prudence, and forethought, and attention, and correctness, and cheerfulness, and humanity, and gentleness, and courtesy, and love of one's kind,  location 21218   
Philo, The Special Laws I, ch.51

{Modesty; 1 Tim 2:9-10; 1 Pet 3:3-4}
LI. (cont)  And she, having assumed an appearance familiar to her, began to speak as follows: "I have seen pleasure, that worker of wondrous tricks, that conjuror and teller of fables,  ... and therefore I have thought fit to declare to you with all sincerity what really belongs to that woman,  ...   "Know, then, that the very dress in which she appear to you wholly belongs to someone else; for often things which contribute to genuine beauty, not one is ever brought forward as being derived from or as belonging to her.  ... But she is hung round with nets and snares with which to catch you with an illegitimate and adulterated beauty, which you, beholding beforehand, will, if you are wise, take care that her pursuit shall be unprofitable to her;  location 21228
Philo, The Special Laws I, ch.51

{Skip}
For He called us when we were not, and willed that out of nothing we should attain a real existence.    location 141275
2nd Clement, Ch. 1

{Isa 54:1; Gal 4:27}
"Rejoice, thou barren that bearest not; break forth and cry, thou that travailest not; for she that is desolate hath many more children than she that hath an husband." In that He said, "Rejoice, thou barren that bearest not," He referred to us, for our Church was barren before that children were given to her.    location 141277
2nd Clement, Ch. 2

{Isa 54:1; Gal 4:27}
And in that He said, "For she that is desolate hath many more children than she that hath an husband," He means that our people seemed to be outcast from God, but now, through believing, have become more numerous than those who are reckoned to possess God.    location 141281
2nd Clement, Ch. 2

{Mt 9:13; Luke 5:32}
And another Scripture saith, "I came not to call the righteous, but sinners." This means that those who are perishing must be saved. For it is indeed a great and admirable thing to establish, not the things which are standing, but these that are falling.    location 141282
2nd Clement, Ch. 2

{Mt 10:32; Mt 15:8; Isa 29:13; Mt 22:37}
For He Himself declares, "Whosoever shall confess Me before men, him will I confess before My Father." This, then, is our reward if we shall confess Him by whom we have been saved. But in what way shall we confess Him? By doing what He says, and not transgressing His commandments, and by honouring Him not with our lips only, but with all our heart and all our mind.    location 141289
2nd Clement, Ch. 3

{Mt 7:21}
Let us, then, not only call Him Lord, for that will not save us. For He saith, "Not every one that saith to Me, Lord, Lord, shall be saved, but he that worketh righteousness." Wherefore, brethren, let us confess Him by our works, by loving one another, by not committing adultery, or speaking evil of one another, or cherishing envy; but being continent, compassionate, and good.    location 141294
2nd Clement, Ch. 4

{Mt 7:23; Luke 13:27}
For this reason, if we should do such wicked things, the Lord hath said, "Even though ye were gathered together to Me in My very bosom, yet if ye were not to keep My commandments, I would cast you off, and say unto you, Depart from Me; I know you not whence ye are, ye workers of iniquity."    location 141298
2nd Clement, Ch. 4
{Mt 10:28; Lk 12:4-5; Heb 11:35-38}
Wherefore, brethren, leaving willingly our sojourn in this present world, let us do the will of Him that called us, and not fear to depart out of this world.    location 141301
2nd Clement, Ch. 5

{Obedience Necessary for Salvation; 1 Jn 2:15-17; 1 Pet 1:14-16; Col 3:1-2}
but the promise of Christ is great and wonderful, even the rest of the kingdom to come, and of life everlasting. By what course of conduct, then, shall we attain these things, but by leading a holy and righteous life, and by deeming these worldly things as not belonging to us, and not fixing our desires upon them? For if we desire to possess them, we fall away from the path of righteousness.    location 141306
2nd Clement, Ch. 5

{Jas 4:4}
This world and the next are two enemies. The one urges to adultery and corruption, avarice and deceit; the other bids farewell to these things. We cannot therefore be the friends of both; and it behooves us, by renouncing the one, to make sure of the other.   location 141312
2nd Clement, Ch. 6

{1 Jn 2:15-17; 2 Pet 3:11-14}
Let us reckon that it is better to hate the things present, since they are trifling, and transient, and corruptible; and to love those which are to come, as being good and incorruptible.    location 141314
2nd Clement, Ch. 6

{Mt 7:21-27}
For if we do the will of Christ, we shall find rest; otherwise, nothing shall deliver us from eternal punishment, if we disobey His commandments.    location 141315
2nd Clement, Ch. 6

{Ezek 14:14; Ezek 14:20}
For thus also saith the Scripture in Ezekiel, "If Noah, Job, and Daniel should rise up, they should not deliver their children in captivity." Now, if men so eminently righteous are not able by their righteousness to deliver their children, how can we hope to enter into the royal residence of God unless we keep our baptism holy and undefiled?    location 141316
2nd Clement, Ch. 6

{Obedience Necessary for Salvation; 1 Thess 4:2-8; 1 Pet 1:14-16}
Or who shall be our advocate, unless we be found possessed of works of holiness and righteousness?    location 141318
2nd Clement, Ch. 6

{Phil 3:12-14; 2 Tim 4:7-8; 1 Cor 9:24-27; Lk 13:24}
yet all are not crowned, but those only that have laboured hard and striven gloriously. Let us therefore so strive, that we may all be crowned. Let us run the straight course, even the race that is incorruptible; and let us in great numbers set out for it, and strive that we may be crowned.    location 141322
2nd Clement, Ch. 7

{Isa 66:24}
For of those who do not preserve the seal unbroken, the Scripture saith, "Their worm shall not die, and their fire shall not be quenched, and they shall be a spectacle to all flesh."    location 141326
2nd Clement, Ch. 7

{Eternal Security; Rev 2:5, 16, 22; Rev 3:3, 19}
while we are in this world, repent with our whole heart of the evil deeds we have done in the flesh, that we may be saved by the Lord, while we have yet an opportunity of repentance.    location 141331
2nd Clement, Ch. 8

{Lk 16:19-31}
For after we have gone out of the world, no further power of confessing or repenting will there belong to us.    location 141332
2nd Clement, Ch. 8

{Lk 16:10-12}
Wherefore, brethren, by doing the will of the Father, and keeping the flesh holy, and observing the commandments of the Lord, we shall obtain eternal life. For the Lord saith in the Gospel, "If ye have not kept that which was small, who will commit to you the great?"    location 141333
2nd Clement, Ch. 8

{1 Cor 6:19-20}
And let no one of you say that this very flesh shall not be judged, nor rise again. Consider ye in what state ye were saved, in what ye received sight, if not while ye were in this flesh. We must therefore preserve the flesh as the temple of God. For as ye were called in the flesh, ye shall also come to be judged in the flesh.    location 141338
2nd Clement, Ch. 9

{Mt 6:8; Isa 46:9-10; Ps 139:4; 1 Kings 8:39; 1 Chr 28:9}
He knows all things beforehand, and is acquainted with what is in our hearts. location 141343
2nd Clement, Ch. 9

{Ps 37:3-4; Ps 37:27-28}
For if we are diligent in doing good, peace will follow us.    location 141348
2nd Clement, Ch. 10

{1 Sam 12:24; 1 Cor 15:58; Heb 10:22}
Let us therefore serve God with a pure heart, and we shall be righteous;    location 141353
2nd Clement, Ch. 11

{Rom 2:6-11; Rev 20:12-13}
For He is faithful who has promised that He will bestow on every one a reward according to his works. If, therefore, we shall do righteousness in the sight of God, we shall enter into His kingdom,    location 141359
2nd Clement, Ch. 11

{Rom 14:17; Mt 24:36; Mt 25:13}
Let us expect, therefore, hour by hour, the kingdom of God in love and righteousness, since we know not the day of the appearing of God.    location 141363
2nd Clement, Ch. 12

{Skip}
For the Lord Himself, being asked by one when His kingdom would come, replied, "When two shall be one, and that which is without as that which is within, and the male with the female, neither male nor female."    location 141364
2nd Clement, Ch. 12

{1 Tim 5:1-2}
And "the male with the female, neither male nor female," this . . . [The newly recovered portion follows: ]- . . . meaneth, that a brother seeing a sister should think nothing about her as of a female, nor she think anything about him as of a male. If ye do these things, saith He, the kingdom of my Father shall    location 141368
2nd Clement, Ch. 12

{Eternal Security; Rev 2:5; Rev 2:16; Rev 2:22; Rev 3:3; Rev 3:19}
Therefore, brethren, let us now at length repent; let us be sober unto what is good; for we are full of much folly and wickedness. Let us blot out from us our former sins, and repenting from the soul let us be saved;    location 141372
2nd Clement, Ch. 13

{Col 4:5-6; Rom 2:24}
nor let us desire to please only one another, but also the men that are without, by our righteousness, that the Name be not blasphemed on account of us.    location 141374
2nd Clement, Ch. 13

{1 Pet.2:12; Phil 2:15-16}
For the Gentiles, when they hear from our mouth the oracles of God, marvel at them as beautiful and great; afterwards, when they have learned that our works are not worthy of the words we speak, they then turn themselves to blasphemy, saying that it is some fable and delusion.    location 141377
2nd Clement, Ch. 13

{Mt 5:44; I Cor 6:1-8}
"but there is a reward unto you, if ye love your enemies and them that hate you;" when they hear these things, they marvel at the excellency of the goodness; but when they see that we not only do not love them that hate us, but not even them that love us, they laugh us to scorn, and the Name is blasphemed.    location 141379
2nd Clement, Ch. 13

{Gal 4:26; Rev. 21:2}
Wherefore, brethren, if we do the will of God our Father, we shall be of the first Church, that is, spiritual, that hath been created before the sun and moon; but if we do not the will of the Lord, we shall be of the scripture that saith, "My house was made a den of robbers." So then let us choose to be of the Church of life, that we may be saved.    location 141383
2nd Clement, Ch. 14

{Gal 4:26; Rev 21:2}
for the scripture saith, "God made man, male and female." the male is Christ, the female is the Church. And the Books and the Apostles plainly declare that the Church is not of the present, but from the beginning. For she was spiritual, as our Jesus also was, but was manifested in the last days that He might save us. Now the Church, being spiritual, was manifested in the flesh of Christ, thus signifying to us that, if any of us keep her in the flesh and do not corrupt her, he shall receive her again in the Holy Spirit:    location 141386
2nd Clement, Ch. 14

{Rom 2:7-8}
For as great as is the pleasure which these sayings have for them that have done them, so great is the condemnation they have for them that have been disobedient.    location 141400
2nd Clement, Ch. 15

{Rev 3:19}
Wherefore, brethren, having received no small occasion for repentance, while we have the opportunity, let us turn unto God that called us, while we still have Him as One that receiveth us.    location 141403
2nd Clement, Ch. 16

{1 Pet 4:8}
Almsgiving therefore is a good thing, as repentance from sin; fasting is better than prayer, but almsgiving than both; "but love covereth a multitude of sins."    location 141407
2nd Clement, Ch. 16

{Alms; Prov 3:27-28; Gal.6:10}
for alms-giving lighteneth the burden of sin.    location 141408
2nd Clement, Ch. 16

{Col 3:16; Rom 15:14}
Let us therefore assist one another that we may also lead up those weak as to what is good, in order that all may be saved; and let us convert and admonish one another. location 141412
2nd Clement, Ch. 17

{Josh 1:8; Ps 1:2; Ps 119:97}
And let us not think to give heed and believe now only, while we are admonished by the presbyters, but also when we have returned home, remembering the commandments of the Lord;    location 141413
2nd Clement, Ch. 17

{2 Pet 3:10-14; Rev 22:12-15}
This He speaketh of the day of His appearing, when He shall come and redeem us, each one according to his works.    location 141416
2nd Clement, Ch. 17

{Isa 66:24; Jude 4-13}
And "their worm dieth not, and their fire is not quenched, and they shall be for a spectacle unto all flesh." He speaketh of that day of judgment, when they shall see those among us that have been ungodly and acted deceitfully with the commandments of Jesus Christ.    location 141419
2nd Clement, Ch. 17

{Mt 25:41; Isa 33:14}
But the righteous who have done well and endured torments and hated the enjoyments of the soul, when they shall behold those that have gone astray and denied Jesus through their words or through their works, how that they are punished with grievous torments in unquenchable fire, shall be giving glory to God, saying, There will be hope for him that hath served God with his whole heart.    location 141421
2nd Clement, Ch. 17

{Eternal Security; 1 Tim 1:13-15}
For I myself also, being an utter sinner, and not yet escaped from temptation, but still being in the midst of the engines of the devil, give diligence to follow after righteousness, that I may have strength to come even near it, fearing the judgment to come.    location 141426
2nd Clement, Ch. 18

{Acts 2:37-38; 2 Cor 7:9-11; I Tim 4:12}
For as a reward I ask of you that ye repent with the whole heart, thus giving to yourselves salvation and life. For by doing this we shall set a goal for all the young who are minded to labour on behalf of piety and the goodness of God.    location 141431
2nd Clement, Ch. 19

{1 Pet 5:9-10; 1 Jn 2:3-5}
Let us then practice righteousness that we may be saved unto the end. Blessed are they that obey these ordinances. Even if for a little time they suffer evil in the world, they shall enjoy the immortal fruit of the resurrection.    location 141435
2nd Clement, Ch. 19

{Ps 37:1-2; Ps 37:16-17; Prov 23:17; Prov 24:19-20}
But neither let it trouble your understanding, that we see the unrighteous having riches and the servants of God straitened.    location 141439
2nd Clement, Ch. 20

{1 Tim 6:6-11}
For if God gave shortly the recompense of the righteous, straightway we would be exercising ourselves in business, not in godliness; for we would seem to be righteous, while pursuing not what is godly but what is gainful.    location 141442
2nd Clement, Ch. 20

{Relationship of the Father and Son; 1 Tim 6:16; 1 Jn 5:20}
To the only God invisible, the Father of truth, who sent forth to us the Saviour and Prince of incorruption,    location 141444
2nd Clement, Ch. 20

{Introduction to ECSB}
"these things in writing by Papias, an ancient man, who was a hearer of John, and a friend of Polycarp, in the fourth of his books; for five books were composed by him." Thus wrote Irenaeus.    location 5286
Papias, Fragments, Ch. 1

{Introduction to ECSB; 2 Tim.2:15-17}
For I did not, like the multitude, take pleasure in those who spoke much, but in those who taught the truth; nor in those who related strange commandments, but in those who rehearsed the commandments given by the Lord to faith, and proceeding from truth itself.    location 5291
Papias, Fragments, Ch. 1

{Introduction to ECSB; Acts 2:42; 1 Thess 2:13; Gal.4:14}
If, then, anyone who had attended on the elders came, I asked minutely after their sayings,-what Andrew or Peter said, or what was said by Philip, or by Thomas, or by James, or by John, or by Mthew, or by any other of the Lord's disciples:    location 5293

{Acts 1:18}
Judas walked about in this world a sad example of impiety; for his body having swollen to such an extent that he could not pass where a chariot could pass easily, he was crushed by the chariot, so that his bowels gushed out.    location 5297
Papias, Fragments, Ch. 1

{Millennium; Isaiah 11:1; 1 Enoch 10:19-20; 2 Baruch 29:5; 
 
Enoch: "each measure will produce a thousand, and each measure of olives will produce ten baths of oil" (10.19-20)."
Baruch: "The earth also shall yield its fruit ten-thousandfold and on each vine there shall be a thousand branches, and each branch shall produce a thousand clusters, and each cluster produce a thousand grapes, and each grape produce a cor of wine.(29.5)"

Irenaeus, Against Heresies (Book V, Chapter 33)
4. " And these things are borne witness to in writing by Papias, the hearer of John, and a companion of Polycarp, in his fourth book; for there were five books compiled by him. And he says in addition, Now these things are credible to believers. And he says that, when the traitor Judas did not give credit to them, and put the question, 'How then can things about to bring forth so abundantly be wrought by the Lord.' the Lord declared, 'They who shall come to these [times] shall see.' "
As the elders who saw John the disciple of the Lord remembered that they had heard from him how the Lord taught in regard to those times, and said]: "The days will come in which vines shall grow, having each ten thousand branches,"    location 5300
Papias, Fragments, Ch. 4

{Millennium; Jn 12:24}
Irenaeus, Against Heresies (Book V, Chapter 33)
"In like manner [the Lord declared] that a grain of wheat would produce ten thousand ears, and that every ear should have ten thousand grains, and every grain would yield ten pounds (quinque bilibres) of clear, pure, fine flour;..."
In like manner, [He said] that a grain of wheat would produce ten thousand ears,    location 5305
Papias, Fragments, Ch. 4

{Isa11:6-9; Isa 65:25}
and that all animals, feeding then only on the productions of the earth, would become peaceable and harmonious, and be in perfect subjection to man."    location 5306
Papias, Fragments, Ch. 4

Isaiah.11:6-9
Isaiah.65:25
These, then, are the times mentioned by the prophet Isaiah: "And the wolf shall lie down with the lamb,' etc. (Isa. xi. 6 ff.)."]    location 5310
Papias, Fragments, Ch. 4

{Rev 2:7}
* Revelation 2:7 N-DMS

NAS: which is in the Paradise of God.'
KJV: in the midst of the paradise of God.
INT: in the paradise of God
As the presbyters say, then those who are deemed worthy of an abode in heaven shall go there, others shall enjoy the delights of Paradise, and others shall possess the splendour of the city; for everywhere the Saviour will be seen, according as they shall be worthy who see Him.    location 5312
Papias, Fragments, Ch. 5

{Jn 14:2; Rev 21:10-25}
As the presbyters say, then those who are deemed worthy of an abode in heaven shall go there, others shall enjoy the delights of Paradise, and others shall possess the splendour of the city; for everywhere the Saviour will be seen, according as they shall be worthy who see Him.    location 5312
Papias, Fragments, Ch. 5

{Jn 14:2; Mt 13:23}
But that there is this distinction between the habitation of those who produce an hundred-fold, and that of those who produce sixty-fold, and that of those who produce thirty-fold; for the first will be taken up into the heavens, the second class will dwell in Paradise, and the last will inhabit the city; and that on this account the Lord said, "In my Father's house are many mansions:"    location 5314
Papias, Fragments, Ch. 5

Mt 25:14-28
Rom.2:6
Rev.22:12
Mt 20:23 (ref.)
a share is given to all by the Father, according as each one is or shall be worthy. location 5318
Papias, Fragments, Ch. 5

2 Cor.3:18
The presbyters, the disciples of the apostles, say that this is the gradation and arrangement of those who are saved, and that they advance through steps of this nature;    location 5319
Papias, Fragments, Ch. 5

Relationship of the Father and Son
1 Cor.15:23-28 
and that, moreover, they ascend through the Spirit to the Son, and through the Son to the Father; and that in due time the Son will yield up His work to the Father,    location 5320
Papias, Fragments, Ch. 5

Rev.21:4
1 Cor.15:26
For in the times of the kingdom the just man who is on the earth shall forget to die. location 5322
Papias, Fragments, Ch. 5

Chapter VI

Introduction to the ECSB
*[A certain presbyter, of whom see Apost. Constitutions, vii. 46, where he is said to have been ordained by St. John, the Evangelist. ref.]
[Papias, who is now mentioned by us, affirms that he received the sayings of the apostles from those who accompanied them, and he moreover asserts that he heard in person Aristion and the presbyter John*. Accordingly he mentions them frequently by name, and in his writings gives their traditions. Our notice of these circumstances may not be without its use. It may also be worthwhile to add to the statements of Papias already given, other passages of his in which he relates some miraculous deeds, stating that he acquired the knowledge of them from tradition.
Papias, Fragments, Ch. 6

Acts.20:8,9
The residence of the Apostle Philip with his daughters in Hierapolis has been mentioned above. We must now point out how Papias, who lived at the same time, relates that he had received a wonderful narrative from the daughters of Philip. For he relates that a dead man was raised to life in his day.
Papias, Fragments, Ch. 6

Acts 1:21-26
Acts.28:5
Rev.20:1-6
He also mentions another miracle relating to Justus, surnamed Barsabas, how he swallowed a deadly poison, and received no harm, on account of the grace of the Lord.
The same person, moreover, has set down other things as coming to him from unwritten tradition, amongst these some strange parables and instructions of the Saviour, and some other things of a more fabulous nature.1758 Amongst these he says that there will be a millennium after the resurrection from the dead, when the personal reign of Christ will be established on this earth. He moreover hands down, in his own writing, other narratives given by the previously mentioned Aristion of the Lord's sayings, and the traditions of
the presbyter John. For information on these points, we can merely refer our readers to the books themselves.
Papias, Fragments, Ch. 6

Acts 15:37-40
Acts 12:12-14 
(Colossians 4:10)
1 Peter 5:13
but now, to the extracts already made, we shall add, as being a Mter of primary
importance, a tradition regarding Mark who wrote the Gospel, which he [Papias] has given in the following words]: And the presbyter said this. Mark having become the interpreter of Peter, wrote down accurately whatsoever he remembered. It was not, however, in exact order that he related the sayings or deeds of Christ. For he neither heard the Lord nor accompanied Him. But afterwards, as I said, he accompanied Peter, who accommodated his instructions to the necessities [of his hearers], but with no intention of giving a regular narrative of the Lord's sayings. Wherefore Mark made no mistake in thus writing some things as he remembered them. For of one thing he took special care, not to omit anything he had heard, and not to put anything fictitious into the statements. [This is what is related by Papias regarding Mark]
Papias, Fragments, Ch. 6
Jn 8:1-11
but with regard to Mthew he has made the following statements]: Mthew put together the oracles [of the Lord] in the Hebrew language, and each one interpreted them as best he could. [The same person uses proofs from the First Epistle of John, and from the Epistle of Peter in like manner. And he also gives another story of a woman who was accused of many sins before the Lord, which is to be found in the Gospel according to the Hebrews.]
Papias, Fragments, Ch. 6

VII    location 5326
VIII    location 5328

cf. Andreas Cæsariensis, [Bishop of Cæsarea in Cappodocia, circiter, vol.77]
With regard to the inspiration of the book (Revelation), we deem it superfluous to add another word; for the blessed Gregory Theologus and Cyril, and even men of still older date, Papias, Irenaeus, Methodius, and Hippolytus, bore entirely satisfactory testimony to it.    location 5329
Papias, Fragments, Ch. 8

IX    location 5331
Jn 13:25
Taking occasion from Papias of Hierapolis, the illustrious, a disciple of the apostle who leaned on the bosom of Christ,    location 5332
Papias, Fragments, Ch. 9

X    location 5335
Jn 19:25
(Luke 6:16)
(Acts 1:13)
(1.) Mary the mother of the Lord; (2.) Mary the wife of Cleophas or Alphaeus, who was the mother of James the bishop and apostle, and of Simon and Thaddeus, and of one Joseph; (3.)    location 5335
Papias, Fragments, Ch. 10

Mark.15:40
Mt 27:56
Jn 19:25
Mark.16:1
Mary Salome, wife of Zebedee, mother of John the evangelist and James;    location 5337
Papias, Fragments, Ch. 10

Jn 19:25
James and Judas and Joseph were sons of an aunt (2) of the Lord's.    location 5337
Papias, Fragments, Ch. 10

Jn 19:25
James also and John were sons of another aunt (3) of the Lord's.    location 5338
Papias, Fragments, Ch. 10

Jn 19:25
Mary (2), mother of James the Less and Joseph, wife of Alphaeus was the sister of Mary the mother of the Lord, whom John names of Cleophas,    location 5338
Papias, Fragments, Ch. 10

{Phil 4:8; Mt 5:27-29; Col 3:1-2}
Is it not your opinion that a righteous man commits sin when an evil desire arises in his heart? There is sin in such a case, and the sin is great," said she; "for the thoughts of a righteous man should be righteous.    location 20661
Hermas, The Shepherd, Book 1, Vision 1, ch. 1

{Parenting}
convert your house, which have committed iniquity against the Lord, and against you, their parents. And although you love your sons, yet did you not warn your house, but permitted them to be terribly corrupted.    location 20678
Hermas, The Shepherd, Book 1, Vision 1, ch. 3

{Prov 22:6; Eph 6:4; Book of Life}
Cease not therefore to admonish your sons; for I know that, if they will repent with all their heart, they will be enrolled in the Books of Life with the saints."    location 20683

{Obedience Essential for Salvation}
He removes the heavens and the mountains, the hills and the seas, and all things become plain to His elect, that He may bestow on them the blessing which He has promised them, with much glory and joy, if only they shall keep the commandments of God which they have received in great faith."    location 20690
Hermas, The Shepherd, Book 1, Vision 1, ch. 3

{Eph 5:25-29; Jas 3:2}
But make known these words to all your children, and to your wife, who is to be your sister. For she does not restrain her tongue, with which she commits iniquity; but, on hearing these words, she will control herself, and will obtain mercy.    location 20712
Hermas, The Shepherd, Book 1, Vision 2, ch. 2

{Heb 10:26-27; Heb 6:5-8}
For the Lord has sworn by His glory, in regard to His elect, that if any one of them sin after a certain day which has been fixed, he shall not be saved. For the repentance of the righteous has limits.    location 20716
Hermas, The Shepherd, Book 1, Vision 2, ch. 2

{Lk 23:40-43}
Filled up are the days of repentance to all the saints; but to the heathen, repentance will be possible even to the last day.    location 20717
Hermas, The Shepherd, Book 1, Vision 2, ch. 2

{Acts 10:35; Jas 2:20-26}
Stand stedfast, therefore, ye who work righteousness, and doubt not,    location 20719
Hermas, The Shepherd, Book 1, Vision 2, ch. 2

{Rev 2:10; Rev 3:10; Mt 24:21}
Happy ye who endure the great tribulation that is coming on, and happy they who shall not deny their own life.    location 20720
Hermas, The Shepherd, Book 1, Vision 2, ch. 2

{Heb 3:12; Mt 10:22; Rev 2:10; Jas 2:20-26}
".. Keep therefore the law of God, my children, and get simplicity, and walk in guilelessness.." The Testament of Issachar Concerning Simplicity, ANF.8
endured great personal tribulations on account of the transgressions of your house, because you did not attend to them, but were careless and engaged in your wicked transactions. But you are saved, because you did not depart from the living God, and on account of your simplicity and great self-control. These have saved you, if you remain steadfast. And they will save all who act in the same manner, and walk in guilelessness and simplicity. Those who possess such virtues will wax strong against every form of wickedness, and will abide unto eternal life. Blessed are all they who practice righteousness, for they shall never be destroyed.    location 20726
Hermas, The Shepherd, Book 1, Vision 2, ch. 3

{Gal 4:26-27; Church, The}
who said to me, "Who do you think that old woman is from whom you received the book?" And I said, "The Sibyl." "You are in a mistake," says he; "it is not the Sibyl." "Who is it then?" say I. And he said, "It is the Church." And I said to him, "Why then is she an old woman?" "Because," said he, "she was created first of all. On this account is she old. And for her sake was the world made."    location 20733
Hermas, The Shepherd, Book 1, Vision 2, ch. 4

{Church Government}
that old woman came and asked me, if I had yet given the book to the presbyters. location 20737
Hermas, The Shepherd, Book 1, Vision 2, ch. 4

{Clement of Rome}
You will write therefore two books, and you will send the one to Clemens and the other to Grapte.    location 20738
Hermas, The Shepherd, Book 1, Vision 2, ch. 4

{Clement of Rome; Church Government}
And Clemens will send his to foreign countries, for permission has been granted to him to do so. And Grapte will admonish the widows and the orphans. But you will read the words in this city, along with the presbyters who preside over the Church."    location 20739
Hermas, The Shepherd, Book 1, Vision 2, ch. 2

{Mt 25:33}
but with her hand beckoned to me to sit down on the left. While I was thinking about this, and feeling vexed that she did not let me sit on the right, she said, "Are you vexed, Hermas? The place to the right is for others who have already pleased God, and have suffered for His name's sake; and you have yet much to accomplish before you can sit with them. But abide as you now do in your simplicity, and you will sit with them, and with all who do their deeds and bear what they have borne."    location 20757
Hermas, The Shepherd, Book 1, Vision 3, ch. 1
{Mt 25:33; Persecution}
"What have they borne?" said I. "Listen," said she: "scourges, prisons, great tribulations, crosses, wild beasts, for God's name's sake. On this account is assigned to them the division of sanctification on the right hand, and to everyone who shall suffer for God's name:   location 20762
Hermas, The Shepherd, Book 1, Vision 3, ch. 2

{Baptism; 1 Pet 3:21}
Hear then why the tower is built upon the waters. It is because your life has been, and will be, saved through water. For the tower was founded on the word of the almighty and glorious Name and it is kept together by the invisible power of the Lord."    location 20791
Hermas, The Shepherd, Book 1, Vision 3, ch. 3

{Obedience Necessary for Salvation}
"Those," she said, "which go into the building without being polished, are those whom God has approved of, for they walked in the straight ways of the Lord and practiced His commandments."    location 20810
Hermas, The Shepherd, Book 1, Vision 3, ch. 5

{Eternal Security}
Those then who are to repent, if they do repent, will be strong in faith, if they now repent while the tower is building. For if the building be finished, there will not be more room for any one, but he will be rejected.    location 20815
Hermas, The Shepherd, Book 1, Vision 3, ch. 5

{Mt 7:21-27}
 who were cut down and thrown far away from the tower, do you wish to know who they are? They are the sons of iniquity, and they believed in hypocrisy, and wickedness did not depart from them. For this reason they are not saved, since they cannot be used in the building on account of their iniquities.    location 20818
Hermas, The Shepherd, Book 1, Vision 3, ch. 6

{Mt 13:18-22; 1 Tim 6:9-10}
These are those who have faith indeed, but they have also the riches of this world. When, therefore, tribulation comes, on account of their riches and business they deny the Lord." I answered and said to her, "When, then, will they be useful for the building, Lady?" "When the riches that now seduce them have been circumscribed, then will they be of use to God.    location 20828
Hermas, The Shepherd, Book 1, Vision 3, ch. 6

{Jas 5:1-5; Lk 6:24; Lk16:25}
For as a round stone cannot become square unless portions be cut off and cast away, so also those who are rich in this world cannot be useful to the Lord unless their riches be cut down. Learn this first from your own case. When you were rich, you were useless; but now you are useful and fit for life.    location 20830
Hermas, The Shepherd, Book 1, Vision 3, ch. 6


{Mt 13:22; Mt 7:13-14}
Do you wish to know who are the others which fell near the waters, but could not be rolled into them? These are they who have heard the word, and wish to be baptized in the name of the Lord; but when the chastity demanded by the truth comes into their recollection, they draw back, and again walk after their own wicked desires."    location 20838
Hermas, The Shepherd, Book 1, Vision 3, ch. 7

{Obedience Necessary for Salvation; Jas 2:21-24}
The first of them, who is clasping her hands, is called Faith. Through her the elect of God are saved. Another, who has her garments tucked up and acts with vigour, is called Self-Restraint. She is the daughter of Faith. Whoever then follows her will become happy in his life, because he will restrain himself from all evil works, believing that, if he restrain himself from all evil desire, he will inherit eternal life."    location 20850
Hermas, The Shepherd, Book 1, Vision 3, ch. 8

{Obedience Necessary for Salvation; Jas 2:21-24}
For from Faith arises Self-restraint; from Self-restraint, Simplicity; from Simplicity, Guilelessness; from Guilelessness, Chastity; from Chastity, Intelligence; and from Intelligence, Love. The deeds, then, of these are pure, and chaste, and divine. Whoever devotes himself to these, and is able to hold fast by their works, shall have his dwelling in the tower with the saints of God."    location 20856
Hermas, The Shepherd, Book 1, Vision 3, ch. 8

{Last Days}
When the tower is finished and built, then comes the end; and I assure you it will be soon finished.    location 20860
Hermas, The Shepherd, Book 1, Vision 3, ch. 8

{Obedience Necessary for Salvation; Jas 2:21-24}
Give ear unto me, O Sons: I have brought you up in much simplicity, and guilelessness, and chastity, on account of the mercy of the Lord, who has dropped His righteousness down upon you, that ye may be made righteous and holy from all your iniquity and depravity; but you do not wish to rest from your iniquity. Now, therefore, listen to me, and be at peace one with another, and visit each other, and bear each other's burdens, and do not partake of God's creatures alone, but give abundantly of them to the needy.  location 20866
Hermas, The Shepherd, Book 1, Vision 3, ch. 9

{Mt 25:41-43; Lk 16:19-20}
This intemperance in eating is thus injurious to you who have abundance and do not distribute among those who are needy.    location 20871
Hermas, The Shepherd, Book 1, Vision 3, ch. 9

{Mt 25:31-40}
Ye, therefore, who are high in position, seek out the hungry as long as the tower is not yet finished; for after the tower is finished, you will wish to do good, but will find no opportunity.    location 20872
Hermas, The Shepherd, Book 1, Vision 3, ch. 9

{Fasting; Mt 6:16-18; Mt 17:21}
"Every prayer should be accompanied with humility: fast, therefore, and you will obtain from the Lord what you beg." I fasted therefore for one day.    location 20888
Hermas, The Shepherd, Book 1, Vision 3, ch. 10

{Lk 12:16-21}
so you, weakened by worldly occupations, have given yourselves up to sloth, and have not cast your cares upon the Lord. Your spirit therefore is broken, and you have grown old in your sorrows."    location 20898

{1 Cor 11:3-16; Eph 5:26,27; Church, The}
lo! a virgin meets me, adorned as if she were proceeding from the bridal chamber, clothed entirely in white, and with white sandals, and veiled up to her forehead, and her head was covered by a hood. And she had white hair. I knew from my former visions that this was the Church,    location 20934
Hermas, The Shepherd, Book 1, Vision 4, ch. 2

{Acts 4:12}
"Deservedly you escaped from it," says she, "because you cast your care on God, and opened your heart to the Lord, believing that you can be saved by no other than by His great and glorious name.    location 20938
Hermas, The Shepherd, Book 1, Vision 4, ch. 2

{Rev 2:10; Rev 3:10; Mt 24:21; Obedience Necessary for Salvation; Jas 2:23-24}
this beast is a type of the great tribulation that is coming. If then ye prepare yourselves, and repent with all your heart, and turn to the Lord, it will be possible for you to escape it, if your heart be pure and spotless, and ye spend the rest of the days of your life in serving the Lord blamelessly. Cast your cares upon the Lord, and He will direct them. Trust the Lord, ye who doubt, for He is all-powerful,    location 20942
Hermas, The Shepherd, Book 1, Vision 4, ch. 2

{Eph 1:4}
But the white part is the age that is to come, in which the elect of God will dwell, since those elected by God to eternal life will be spotless and pure.    location 20952
Hermas, The Shepherd, Book 1, Vision 4, ch. 3

{Obedience Necessary for Salvation; Jas 2:23-24; Heb 10:26-27}
Accordingly I wrote down the commandments and similitudes, exactly as he had ordered me. If then, when you have heard these, ye keep them and walk in them, and practice them with pure minds, you will receive from the Lord all that He has promised to you. But if, after you have heard them, ye do not repent, but continue to add to your sins, then shall ye receive from the Lord the opposite things. All these words did the shepherd, even the angel of repentance, command me to write.    location 20968
Hermas, The Shepherd, Book 1, Vision 5

{Heb 11:3; Isa 45:18}
First of all, believe that there is one God who created and finished all things, and made all things out of nothing. He alone is able to contain the whole, but Himself cannot be contained.    location 20974
Hermas, The Shepherd, Book 2, Commandment 1

{1 Pet 3:10-12; Jas 4:11  Lev 19:16; Prov 10:18; Prov 18:8; Prov 20:19}
First, then, speak evil of no one, nor listen with pleasure to anyone who speaks evil of another. But if you listen, you will partake of the sin of him who speaks evil, if you believe the slander which you hear; for believing it, you will also have something to say against your brother. Thus, then, will you be guilty of the sin of him who slanders.    location 20979
Hermas, The Shepherd, Book 2, Commandment 2

{Alms; Mt 5:42; Lk 11:41; Lk 12:33}
rewards of your labors, which God gives you, give to all the needy in simplicity, not hesitating as to whom you are to give or not to give. Give to all, for God wishes His gifts to be shared amongst all. They who receive, will render an account to God why and for what they have received. For the afflicted who receive will not be condemned, but they who receive on false pretences will suffer punishment. He, then, who gives is guiltless. location 20984
Hermas, The Shepherd, Book 2, Commandment 2

{Alms; Mt 5:42; Lk 11:41; Lk 12:33}
not hesitating as to whom he should give and to whom he should not give.    location 20987
Hermas, The Shepherd, Book 2, Commandment 2

Third Commandment: On Avoiding Falsehood, and on the Repentance of Hermas    location 20990

{Jn 7:18}
"Love the truth, and let nothing but truth proceed from your mouth, that the spirit which God has placed in your flesh may be found truthful before all men; and the Lord, who dwelleth in you, will be glorified, because the Lord is truthful in every word, and in Him is no falsehood.    location 20992
Hermas, The Shepherd, Book 2, Commandment 3

{Obedience Necessary for Salvation; Eternal Security}
"Because, sir, I know not if I can be saved." "Why?" said he. And I said, "Because, sir, I never spake a true word in my life, but have ever spoken cunningly to all, and have affirmed a lie for the truth to all; and no one ever contradicted me, but credit was given to my word. How then can I live, since I have acted thus?"    location 20996
Hermas, The Shepherd, Book 2, Commandment 3

{Obedience Necessary for Salvation}
If you keep these precepts, and from this time forward you speak nothing but the truth, it will be possible for you to obtain life.    location 21003
Hermas, The Shepherd, Book 2, Commandment 3

{Mt 5:5:27-28; 1 Tim 5:2; Prov 6:25; 1 Thess 4:7}
"I charge you," said he, "to guard your chastity, and let no thought enter your heart of another man's wife, or of fornication, or of similar iniquities; for by doing this you commit a great sin. But if you always remember your own wife, you will never sin. For if this thought enter your heart, then you will sin; and if, in like manner, you think other wicked thoughts, you commit sin.    location 21006
Hermas, The Shepherd, Book 2, Commandment 4, ch. 1

{Mt 5:32; Mt 19:9}
 "Sir, if any one has a wife who trusts in the Lord, and if he detect her in adultery, does the man sin if he continue to live with her?" And he said to me, "As long as he remains ignorant of her sin, the husband commits no transgression in living with her. But if the husband know that his wife has gone astray, and if the woman does not repent, but persists in her fornication, and yet the husband continues to live with her, he also is guilty of her crime, and a sharer in her adultery."    location 21012
Hermas, The Shepherd, Book 2, Commandment 4, ch. 1

{Mt 5:32; Mt 19:9}
And I said to him, "What then, sir, is the husband to do, if his wife continue in her vicious practices?" And he said, "The husband should put her away, and remain by himself. But if he put his wife away and marry another, he also commits adultery."    location 21015
Hermas, The Shepherd, Book 2, Commandment 4, ch. 1

{Mt 5:32; Mt 19:9}
And I said to him, "What if the woman put away should repent, and wish to return to her husband: shall she not be taken back by her husband?" And he said to me, "Assuredly. If the husband does not take her back, he sins, and brings a great sin upon himself; location 21017
Hermas, The Shepherd, Book 2, Commandment 4, ch. 1

{Mt 5:32; Mt 19:9}
But not frequently. For there is but one repentance to the servants of God. In case, therefore, that the divorced wife may repent, the husband ought not to marry another, when his wife has been put away. In this matter man and woman are to be treated exactly in the same way.    location 21019
Hermas, The Shepherd, Book 2, Commandment 4, ch. 1

{Mt 5:32; Mt 19:9}
Wherefore if any one persists in such deeds, and repents not, withdraw from him, and cease to live with him, otherwise you are a sharer in his sin. Therefore has the injunction been laid on you, that you should remain by yourselves, both man and woman, for in such persons repentance can take place.    location 21021
Hermas, The Shepherd, Book 2, Commandment 4, ch. 1

{Obedience Necessary for Salvation; Jas 2:14-26; 1 Jn 5:2-3; Jn 14:15}
And I said to him, "It is for this reason, sir, that I inquire carefully into all things, especially because I am a sinner; that I may know what works I should do, that I may live: for my sins are many and various." And he said to me, "You shall live if you keep my commandments, and walk in them; and whosoever shall hear and keep these commandments, shall live to God."    location 21032
Hermas, The Shepherd, Book 2, Commandment 4, ch. 2

{Eternal Security; Heb 6:4-8; Heb 10:26-27; 2 Pet 2:20-22}
And I said, "I heard, sir, some teachers maintain that there is no other repentance than that which takes place, when we descended into the water and received remission of our former sins." He said to me, "That was sound doctrine which you heard; for that is really the case. For he who has received remission of his sins ought not to sin any more, but to live in purity. Since, however, you inquire diligently into all things, I will point this also out to you, not as giving occasion for error to those who are to believe, or have lately believed, in the Lord. For those who have now believed, and those who are to believe, have not repentance for their sins; but they have remission of their previous sins. For to those who have been called before these days, the Lord has set repentance. For the Lord, knowing the heart, and foreknowing all things, knew the weakness of men and the manifold wiles of the devil, that he would inflict some evil on the servants of God, and would act wickedly towards them. The Lord, therefore, being merciful, has had mercy on the work of His hand, and has set repentance for them; and He has entrusted to me power over this repentance. And therefore I say to you, that if any one is tempted by the devil, and sins after that great and holy calling in which the Lord has called His people to everlasting life, he has opportunity to repent but once.    location 21036
Hermas, The Shepherd, Book 2, Commandment 4, ch. 3

{Eternal Security; Obedience Necessary for Salvation}
But if he should sin frequently after this, and then repent, to such a man his repentance will be of no avail; for with difficulty will he live." And I said, "Sir, I feel that life has come back to me in listening attentively to these commandments; for I know that I shall be saved, if in future I sin no more." And he said, "You will be saved, you and all who keep these commandments."    location 21045
Hermas, The Shepherd, Book 2, Commandment 4, ch. 3

{1Cor 7:39-40}
And I said, "If a wife or husand dies, and the widower or widow marry, does he or she commit sin?" "There is no sin in marrying again," said he; "but if they remain unmarried, they gain greater honor and glory with the Lord. But if they marry, they do not sin."
Hermas, The Shepherd, Book 2, Commandment 4, ch. 5

{Wormwood; Rev 8:11}
For if an exceedingly small piece of wormwood be taken and put into a jar of honey, is not the honey entirely destroyed, and does not the exceedingly small piece of wormwood entirely take away the sweetness of the honey, so that it no longer affords any gratification location 21063
Hermas, The Shepherd, Book 2, Commandment 5, ch. 1

{Heb 1:19-20; Prov 16:32; Prov 14:29}
"I should like, sir," said I, "to know the power of anger, that I may guard myself against it." And he said, "If you do not guard yourself against it, you and your house lose all hope of salvation. Guard yourself, therefore, against it. For I am with you, and all will depart from it who repent with their whole heart. For I will be with them, and I will save them all.    location 21067
Hermas, The Shepherd, Book 2, Commandment 5, ch. 1

{Mt 7; Prov 2:13-15; Prov 21:8; Isa 26:7}
For the path of righteousness is straight, but that of unrighteousness is crooked. But walk in the straight and even way, and mind not the crooked.    location 21093
Hermas, The Shepherd, Book 2, Commandment 6, ch. 1

{Angels}
"Hear now," said he, "in regard to faith. There are two angels with a man-one of righteousness, and the other of iniquity."    location 21098
Hermas, The Shepherd, Book 2, Commandment 6, ch. 2

{Angels}
These are the deeds of the angel of righteousness. Trust him, then, and his works. Look now at the works of the angel of iniquity. First, he is wrathful, and bitter, and foolish, and his works are evil, and ruin the servants of God. When, then, he ascends into your heart, know him by his works." And I said to him, "How, sir, I shall perceive him, I do not know." "Hear and understand" said he. "When anger comes upon you, or harshness, know that he is in you; and you will know this to be the case also, when you are attacked by a longing after many transactions, and the richest delicacies, and drunken revels, and divers luxuries, and things improper, and by a hankering after women, and by overreaching, and pride, and blustering, and by whatever is like to these.    location 21102
Hermas, The Shepherd, Book 2, Commandment 6, ch. 2

{1 Jn 5:3; Eccl 12:13}
"Fear," said he, "the Lord, and keep His commandments. For if you keep the commandments of God, you will be powerful in every action, and every one of your actions will be incomparable. 

{1 Jn 4:4, Mt 10:28}
For, fearing the Lord, you will do all things well. This is the fear which you ought to have, that you may be saved. But fear not the devil; for, fearing the Lord, you will have dominion over the devil, for there is no power in him.    location 21117
Hermas, The Shepherd, Book 2, Commandment 7

{Eccl 12:13}
Fear, then, the Lord, and you will live to Him, and as many as fear Him and keep His commandments will live to God."    location 21124
Hermas, The Shepherd, Book 2, Commandment 7

{Mt 7:21-27}
They only who fear the Lord and keep His commandments have life with God; but as to those who keep not His commandments, there is no life in them."    location 21126
Hermas, The Shepherd, Book 2, Commandment 7

{Gluttony; Riches; Prov 23:2; Prov 23:20-21}
"What, sir," say I, "are the evil deeds from which we must restrain ourselves?" "Hear," says he: "from adultery and fornication, from unlawful revelling, from wicked luxury, from indulgence in many kinds of food and the extravagance of riches, and from boastfulness, and haughtiness, and insolence, and lies, and backbiting, and hypocrisy, from the remembrance of wrong, and from all slander. These are the deeds that are most wicked in the life of men.    location 21134
Hermas, The Shepherd, Book 2, Commandment 8

{Obedience Necessary for Salvation}
"any other evil deeds?" "There are," says he; "and many of them, too, from which the servant of God must restrain himself-theft, lying, robbery, false witness, overreaching, wicked lust, deceit, vainglory, boastfulness, and all other vices like to these." location 21138
Hermas, The Shepherd, Book 2, Commandment 8

{Jas 1:27; Rom 12:13; Deut 14:29; Prov 10:19; Prov 17:27-28; Prov 29:11; Job 6:24; Ps 4:4; Lev 19:32; Ezek 18:7-9; Ex 22:25-27}
"Listen," says he, "to the good deeds which you ought to do, and in regard to which there is no self-restraint requisite. First of all there is faith, then fear of the Lord, love, concord, words of righteousness, truth, patience. Than these, nothing is better in the life of men. If anyone attend to these, and restrain himself not from them, blessed is he in his life. Then there are the following attendant on these: helping widows, looking after orphans and the needy, rescuing the servants of God from necessities, then being hospitable-for in hospitality good-doing finds a field-never opposing anyone, being quiet, having fewer needs than all men, reverencing the aged, practising righteousness, watching the brotherhood, bearing insolence, being long-suffering, encouraging those who are sick in soul, not casting those who have fallen into sin from the faith, but turning them back and restoring them to peace of mind, admonishing sinners, not oppressing debtors and the needy, and if there are any other actions like these.    location 21145
Hermas, The Shepherd, Book 2, Commandment 8

{Jas 1:5-6}
He says to me, "Put away doubting from you and do not hesitate to ask of the Lord, saying to yourself, How can I ask of the Lord and receive from Him, seeing I have sinned so much against Him? Do not thus reason with yourself, but with all your heart turn to the Lord and ask of Him without doubting,    location 21158
Hermas, The Shepherd, Book 2, Commandment 9

{Heb 8:12; Heb 10:17; Jer 31:34; Isa 43:25}
For He is not like men, who remember evils done against them; but He Himself remembers not evils, and has compassion on His own creature.    location 21160
Hermas, The Shepherd, Book 2, Commandment 9

{Jas 1:5-6} 
ask of the Lord and you will receive all, and in none of your requests will you be denied which you make to the Lord without doubting. But if you doubt in your heart, you will receive none of your requests. For those who doubt regarding God are double-souled, and obtain not one of their requests. But those who are perfect in faith ask everything, trusting in the Lord; and they obtain, because they ask nothing doubting, and not being double-souled.    location 21162
Hermas, The Shepherd, Book 2, Commandment 9

{Lk 18:1-8; Lk 11:5-13}
Wherefore do not cease to make the request of your soul, and you will obtain it. But if you grow weary and waver in your request, blame yourself, and not Him who does not give to you.    location 21169
Hermas, The Shepherd, Book 2, Commandment 9

{Riches; Eph 4:18}
"Those who have never searched for the truth, nor investigated the nature of the Divinity, but have simply believed, when they devote themselves to and become mixed up with business, and wealth, and heathen friendships, and many other actions of this world, do not perceive the parables of Divinity; for their minds are darkened by these actions, and they are corrupted and become dried up.    location 21183
Hermas, The Shepherd, Book 2, Commandment 10, ch. 1

{Eph 4:30}
Wherefore remove grief from you, and crush not the Holy Spirit which dwells in you, lest he entreat God against you, and he withdraw from you. For the Spirit of God which has been granted to us to dwell in this body does not endure grief nor straitness.  location 21197
Hermas, The Shepherd, Book 2, Commandment 10, ch. 2

{Jn 14:26; Jn 16:7}
First, he acts wickedly because he grieves the Holy Spirit, which was given to man a cheerful Spirit.    location 21200
Hermas, The Shepherd, Book 2, Commandment 10, ch. 2

{Prophet: What Constitutes a True Prophet}
For he who inquires of a false prophet in regard to any action is an idolater, and devoid of the truth, and foolish. For no spirit given by God requires to be asked; but such a spirit having the power of Divinity speaks all things of itself,    location 21217
Hermas, The Shepherd, Book 2, Commandment 11

{Prophet: What Constitutes a True Prophet; Deut 18:20-22}
"I will tell you," says he, "about both the prophets, and then you can try the true and the false prophet according to my directions. Try the man who has the Divine Spirit by his life. First, he who has the Divine Spirit proceeding from above is meek, and peaceable, and humble, and refrains from all iniquity and the vain desire of this world, and contents himself with fewer wants than those of other men, and when asked he makes no reply; nor does he speak privately, nor when man wishes the spirit to speak does the Holy Spirit speak, but it speaks only when God wishes it to speak. When, then, a man having the Divine Spirit comes into an assembly of righteous men who have faith in the Divine Spirit, and this assembly of men offers up prayer to God, then the angel of the prophetic Spirit, who is destined for him, fills the man; and the man being filled with the Holy Spirit, speaks to the multitude as the Lord wishes. Thus, then, will the Spirit of Divinity become manifest.    location 21221
Hermas, The Shepherd, Book 2, Commandment 11

{Prophet: What Constitutes a True Prophet; Deut 18:20-22}
the man who seems to have the Spirit exalts himself, and wishes to have the first seat, and is bold, and impudent, and talkative, and lives in the midst of many luxuries and many other delusions, and takes rewards for his prophecy; and if he does not receive rewards, he does not prophesy.    location 21229
Hermas, The Shepherd, Book 2, Commandment 11

{Prophet: What Constitutes a True Prophet; Deut 18:20-22}
Try by his deeds and his life the man who says that he is inspired. But as for you, trust the Spirit which comes from God, and has power; but the spirit which is earthly and empty trust not at all, for there is no power in it: it comes from the devil.    location 21239
Hermas, The Shepherd, Book 2, Commandment 11

{1 Jn 2:15-16}
"Foremost of all is the desire after another's wife or husband, and after extravagance, and many useless dainties and drinks, and many other foolish luxuries; for all luxury is foolish and empty in the servants of God. These, then, are the evil desires which slay the servants of God.    location 21256
Hermas, The Shepherd, Book 2, Commandment 12, ch. 2

{Obedience Necessary for Salvation; Mt 7:24-27}
"But I do not know if these commandments can be kept by man, because they are exceeding hard." He answered and said to me, "If you lay it down as certain that they can be kept, then you will easily keep them, and they will not be hard. But if you come to imagine that they cannot be kept by man, then you will not keep them. Now I say to you, If you do not keep them, but neglect them, you will not be saved, nor your children, nor your house, since you have already determined for yourself that these commandments cannot be kept by man."    location 21273
Hermas, The Shepherd, Book 2, Commandment 12, ch. 3

{Obedience Necessary for Salvation; Mt 7:21; Mt 15:8; Isa 29:13}
If, then, man is lord of the creatures of God, and rules over all, is he not able to be lord also of these commandments? For," says he, "the man who has the Lord in his heart can also be lord of all, and of every one of these commandments. But to those who have the Lord only on their lips, but their hearts hardened, and who are far from the Lord, the commandments are hard and difficult. Put, therefore, ye who are empty and fickle in your faith, the Lord in your heart, and ye will know that there is nothing easier or sweeter, or more manageable, than these commandments.    location 21281
Hermas, The Shepherd, Book 2, Commandment 12, ch. 4

{Zech 1:3; Hos 14:1; Job 22:23}
Return, ye who walk in the commandments of the devil, in hard, and bitter, and wild licentiousness, and fear not the devil; for there is no power in him against you,    location 21285
Hermas, The Shepherd, Book 2, Commandment 12, ch. 4

{Jas 4:7; 1 Pet 5:9}
the devil is hard, and holds sway over them." "He cannot," says he, "hold sway over the servants of God, who with all their heart place their hopes in Him. The devil can wrestle against these, overthrow them he cannot. If, then, ye resist him, he will be conquered, and flee in disgrace from you.    location 21290
Hermas, The Shepherd, Book 2, Commandment 12, ch. 5

{1 Pet 5:8-9]
So also the devil goes to all the servants of God to try them. As many, then, as are full in the faith, resist him strongly, and he withdraws from them, having no way by which he might enter 
Hermas, The Shepherd, Book 2, Commandment 12, ch. 5

{Neh 1:9; Isa 55:7}
for if ye return to the Lord with all your heart, and practice righteousness the rest of your days, and serve Him according to His will, He will heal your former sins, and you will have power to hold sway over the works of the devil.    location 21300
Hermas, The Shepherd, Book 2, Commandment 12, ch. 6

{Riches; 1Pet 2:11-12; Heb 11:9-16}
He says to me, "You know that you who are the servants of God dwell in a strange land; for your city is far away from this one. If, then," he continues, "you know your city in which you are to dwell, why do ye here provide lands, and make expensive preparations, and accumulate dwellings and useless buildings? He who makes such preparations for this city cannot return again to his own.    location 21311
Hermas, The Shepherd, Book 3, Similitude 1

{1Pet 2:11-12; Heb 11:9-16}
Have a care, therefore: as one living in a foreign land, make no further preparations for thyself than such merely as may be sufficient; and be ready, when the master of this city shall come to cast thee out for disobeying his law, to leave his city, and to depart to thine own, and to obey thine own law without being exposed to annoyance, but in great joy. Have a care, then, ye who serve the Lord, and have Him in your heart, that ye work the works of God, remembering His commandments and promises which He promised. location 21320
Hermas, The Shepherd, Book 3, Similitude 1

{Alms; Jas 1:27; Lk 16:9; Lk 11:41; Lk 12:33}
Instead of lands, therefore, buy afflicted souls, according as each one is able, and visit widows and orphans, and do not overlook them; and spend your wealth and all your preparations, which ye received from the Lord, upon such lands and houses. For to this end did the Master make you rich, that you might perform these services unto Him. location 21324
Hermas, The Shepherd, Book 3, Similitude 1

{Ex 20:17; 1 Thess 4:11-12}
do not corrupt nor touch what is another's nor covet it, for it is an evil thing to covet the goods of other men; but work thine own work, and thou wilt be saved."    location 21329
Hermas, The Shepherd, Book 3, Similitude 1

{Lk 16:9-11; Riches; Lk 11:41; Lk 12:33}
"The rich man has much wealth, but is poor in matters relating to the Lord, because he is distracted about his riches; and he offers very few confessions and intercessions to the Lord, and those which he does offer are small and weak, and have no power above. But when the rich man refreshes the poor, and assists him in his necessities, believing that what he does to the poor man will be able to find its reward with God-because the poor man is rich in intercession and confession, and his intercession has great power with God-then the rich man helps the poor in all things without hesitation; and the poor man, being helped by the rich, intercedes for him, giving thanks to God for him who bestows gifts upon him.    location 21341
Hermas, The Shepherd, Book 3, Similitude 2

{Lk 16:9-11}
And the rich man, in like manner, unhesitatingly bestows upon the poor man the riches which he received from the Lord. And this is a great work, and acceptable before God, because he understands the object of his wealth, and has given to the poor of the gifts of the Lord. ... [poor] men interceding with the Lord on behalf of the rich, increase their riches; and the rich, again, aiding the poor in their necessities, satisfy their souls. Both, therefore, are partners in the righteous work.    location 21353
Hermas, The Shepherd, Book 3, Similitude 2

{Mt 7:16-20}
"Those," he said, "which are budding are the righteous who are to live in the world to come; for the coming world is the summer of the righteous, but the winter of sinners. When, therefore, the mercy of the Lord shines forth, then shall they be made manifest who are the servants of God, and all men shall be made manifest. For as in summer the fruits of each individual tree appear, and it is ascertained of what sort they are, so also the fruits of the righteous shall be manifest, and all who have been fruitful in that world shall be made known.    location 21367
Hermas, The Shepherd, Book 3, Similitude 4

{Mt 7:19; Jn 15:6}
be found to be those who have been withered and unfruitful in that world, and shall be burnt as wood, and [so] made manifest, because their actions were evil during their lives. For the sinners shall be consumed because they sinned and did not repent, and the heathen shall be burned because they knew not Him who created them.    location 21372
Hermas, The Shepherd, Book 3, Similitude 4

{Riches; Jas 4:13-15; Lk 12:18-20}
And refrain from much business, and you will never sin: for they who are occupied with much business commit also many sins, being distracted about their affairs, and not at all serving their Lord.    location 21374
Hermas, The Shepherd, Book 3, Similitude 4

{Jn 15:1-16}
If, therefore, you do these things, you shall be able to bear fruit for the life to come. And every one who will do these things shall bear fruit."    location 21378
Hermas, The Shepherd, Book 3, Similitude 4

{Fasting; Mt 6:16; Mt 9:15; Lk 18:12; Mt 17:21; Acts 10:30; 1 Cor 7:5}
I see the Shepherd sitting down beside me, and saying, "Why have you come hither [so] early in the morning?" "Because, sir," I answered, "I have a station." "What is a station?" he asked. "I am fasting, sir," I replied.    location 21382
Hermas, The Shepherd, Book 3, Similitude 5, ch. 1

{Fasting; Mt 6:16; Mt 9:15; Lk 18:12; Mt 17:21; Acts 10:30; 1 Cor 7:5; Isa 58:6-12}
"I say to you," he continued, "that the fasting which you think you observe is not a fasting. But I will teach you what is a full and acceptable fasting to the Lord. Listen," he continued: "God does not desire such an empty fasting. For fasting to God in this way you will do nothing for a righteous life; but offer to God a fasting of the following kind: Do no evil in your life, and serve the Lord with a pure heart: keep His commandments, walking in His precepts, and let no evil desire arise in your heart; and believe in God. If you do these things, and fear Him, and abstain from every evil thing, you will live unto God; and if you do these things, you will keep a great fast, and one acceptable before God."   location 21386
Hermas, The Shepherd, Book 3, Similitude 5, ch. 1

{Adoption; Manumission of Slaves; Gal 4:5; Eph 1:5}
And he said to them, I promised this slave freedom if he obeyed the command which I gave him; and he has kept my command, and done besides a good work to the vineyard, and has pleased me exceedingly. In return, therefore, for the work which he has done, I wish to make him co-heir with my son, because, having good thoughts, he did not neglect them, but carried them out.' With this resolution of the master his son and friends were well pleased, viz., that the slave should be co-heir with the son.    location 21403
Hermas, The Shepherd, Book 3, Similitude 5, ch. 2

{Mt 24:45}
And the slave receiving the dishes that were sent him from his master, took of them what was sufficient for himself, and distributed the rest among his fellow-slaves. And his fellow-slaves rejoiced to receive the dishes, and began to pray for him, that he might find still greater favor with his master for having so treated them. His master heard all these things that were done, and was again greatly pleased with his conduct.    location 21407
Hermas, The Shepherd, Book 3, Similitude 5, ch. 2

{Obedience Necessary for Salvation}
[Keep the commandments of the Lord, and you will be approved, and inscribed amongst the number of those who observe His commands.] And if you do any good beyond what is commanded by God, you will gain for yourself more abundant glory, and will be more honoured by God than you would otherwise be. If, therefore, in keeping the commandments of God, you do, in addition, these services, you will have joy if you observe them according to my command."    location 21414
Hermas, The Shepherd, Book 3, Similitude 5, ch. 3

{Obedience Necessary for Salvation; Fasting; Mt 6:16; Mt 9:15; Lk 18:12; Mt 17:21; Acts 10:30; 1 Cor 7:5}
This fasting," he continued, "is very good, provided the commandments of the Lord be observed. Thus, then, shall you observe the fasting which you intend to keep. First of all, be on your guard against every evil word, and every evil desire, and purify your heart from all the vanities of this world. If you guard against these things, your fasting will be perfect. And you will do also as follows. Having fulfilled what is written, in the day on which you fast you will taste nothing but bread and water; and having reckoned up the price of the dishes of that day which you intended to have eaten, you will give it to a widow, or an orphan, or to some person in want, and thus you will exhibit humility of mind, so that he who has received benefit from your humility may fill his own soul, and pray for you to the Lord.    location 21419

{Relationship of the Father and the Son; Isa 5:1-7; Prov 27:2-6; Ps 80:8-13; Mt 21:33}
"God planted the vineyard, that is to say, He created the people, and gave them to His Son; and the Son appointed His angels over them to keep them; and He Himself purged away their sins, having suffered many trials and undergone many labors, for no one is able to dig without labor and toil. He Himself, then, having purged away the sins of the people, showed them the paths of life by giving them the law which He received from His Father. [You see," he said, "that He is the Lord of the people, having received all authority from His Father. ] And why the Lord took His Son as councillor, and the glorious angels, regarding the heirship of the slave, listen. The holy, pre-existent Spirit, that created every creature, God made to dwell in flesh, which He chose. This flesh, accordingly, in which the Holy Spirit dwelt, was nobly subject to that Spirit, walking religiously and chastely, in no respect defiling the Spirit; and accordingly, after living excellently and purely, and after laboring and co-operating with the Spirit, and having in everything acted vigorously and courageously along with the Holy Spirit, He assumed it as a partner with it.   location 21453
Hermas, The Shepherd, Book 3, Similitude 5, ch. 6

{Rev 19:8; Eph 1:4; Col 1:22; 2 Cor 7:1; 1 Cor 6:19-20}
for the flesh that has been found without spot or defilement, in which the Holy Spirit dwelt, [will receive a reward ]. You have now the explanation of this parable also."  location 21463
Hermas, The Shepherd, Book 3, Similitude 5, ch. 6

{Obedience Necessary for Salvation}
"Hear," again he replied: "Keep this flesh pure and stainless, that the Spirit which inhabits it may bear witness to it, and your flesh may be justified.    location 21466
Hermas, The Shepherd, Book 3, Similitude 5, ch. 7

{1 Cor 6:15-20}
If you defile your flesh, you will also defile the Holy Spirit; and if you defile your flesh [and spirit], you will not live."    location 21468
Hermas, The Shepherd, Book 3, Similitude 5, ch. 7

{2 Cor 7:1; 1 Pet 1:15-16}
"And if any one, sir," I said, "has been hitherto ignorant, before he heard these words, how can such a man be saved who has defiled his flesh?" "Respecting former sins of ignorance," he said, "God alone is able to heal them, for to Him belongs all power. [But be on your guard now, and the all-powerful and compassionate God will heal former transgressions ], if for the time to come you defile not your body nor your spirit; for both are common, and cannot be defiled, the one without the other: keep both therefore pure, and you will live unto God."    location 21469
Hermas, The Shepherd, Book 3, Similitude 5, ch. 7

{Heb 10:26-27; Heb 6:4-8}
"The sheep which you saw merry and leaping about, are those which have torn themselves away from God for ever, and have delivered themselves over to luxuries and deceits [of this world. Among them there is no return to life through repentance, because they have added to their other sins, and blasphemed the name of the Lord. Such men therefore, are appointed unto death. And the sheep which you saw not leaping, but feeding in one place, are they who have delivered themselves over to luxury and deceit], but have committed no blasphemy against the Lord. These have been perverted from the truth: among them there is the hope of repentance, by which it is possible to live.    location 21492
Hermas, The Shepherd, Book 3, Similitude 6, ch. 2

{Angels; 1 Cor 11:30; Ps 78:49; Gen 19:13; Ex 12:23; 2 Kings 19:35; 2 Chr 32:21; Isa 37:36; Ps 35:4-6; Ex 32:35; 2 Sam 24:16-17; 1 Chr 21:15-16; 1 Cor 10:10; Acts 12:18-23; Rev 8:1-13; Rev 9:1-16; Rev 10:5-7; Mt 13:37-41; Mt 13:49-50; Mt 24:31; Rev 14:15-19; Rev 15:1; Rev 14:16-19; Rev 15:6-8; Rev 16:1-21; Rev 18:21; Rev 19:17-18; Rev 20:1-3}
"This," he replied, "is the angel of punishment; and he belongs to the just angels, and is appointed to punish. He accordingly takes those who wander away from God, and who have walked in the desires and deceits of this world, and chastises them as they deserve with terrible and diverse punishments." "I would know, sir," I said, "Of what nature are these diverse tortures and punishments?" "Hear," he said, "the various tortures and punishments. The tortures are such as occur during life. For some are punished with losses, others with want, others with sicknesses of various kinds, and others with all kinds of disorder and confusion; others are insulted by unworthy persons, and exposed to suffering in many other ways: for many, becoming unstable in their plans, try many things, and none of them at all succeed,    location 21507
Hermas, The Shepherd, Book 3, Similitude 6, ch. 3

{Luxury}
who indulges in luxury, and is deceived for one day, and who does what he wishes, is clothed with much foolishness, and does not understand the act which he does until the morrow; for he forgets what he did the day before. For luxury and deceit have no memories, on account of the folly with which they are clothed; but when punishment and torture cleave to a man for one day, he is punished and tortured for a year; for punishment and torture have powerful memories. While tortured and punished, therefore, for a whole year, he remembers at last his luxury and deceit, and knows that on their account he suffers evil.    location 21529
Hermas, The Shepherd, Book 3, Similitude 6, ch. 5

{1 Cor 10:1-12; I Cor 6:9-10; 2 Pet 2:1-22; Lk 16:19}
"What kinds of luxury, sir," I asked, "are hurtful?" "Every act of a man which he performs with pleasure," he replied, "is an act of luxury; for the sharp-tempered man, when gratifying his tendency, indulges in luxury; and the adulterer, and the drunkard, and the back-biter, and the liar, and the covetous man, and the thief, and he who does things like these, gratifies his peculiar propensity, and in so doing indulges in luxury. All these acts of luxury are hurtful to the servants of God. On account of these deceits, therefore, do they suffer, who are punished and tortured. And there are also acts of luxury which save men; for many who do good indulge in luxury, being carried away by their own pleasure: this luxury, however, is beneficial to the servants of God, and gains life for such a man; but the injurious acts of luxury before enumerated bring tortures and punishment upon them; and if they continue in them and do not repent, they bring death upon themselves."    location 21534
Hermas, The Shepherd, Book 3, Similitude 6, ch. 5

{Repentance; Lk 3:7-9; 2 Sam 12:1-13; 1 Kings 21:27-29; 2 Kings 22:11; 2 Kings 22:19; Lk 18:13; Job 42:6; Jon 3:5-10}
"Your sins are many, but not so great as to require that you be delivered over to this angel; but your household has committed great iniquities and sins, and the glorious angel has been incensed at them on account of their deeds; and for this reason he commanded you to be afflicted for a certain time, that they also might repent, and purify themselves from every desire of this world. When, therefore, they repent and are purified, then the angel of punishment will depart." I said to him, "Sir, if they have done such things as to incense the glorious angel against them, yet what have I done?" He replied, "They cannot be afflicted at all, unless you, the head of the house, be afflicted: for when you are afflicted, of necessity they also suffer affliction; but if you are in comfort, they can feel no affliction." "Well, sir," I said, "they have repented with their whole heart." "I know, too," he answered, "that they have repented with their whole heart: do you think, however, that the sins of those who repent are remitted? Not altogether, but he who repents must torture his own soul, and be exceedingly humble in all his conduct, and be afflicted with many kinds of affliction; and if he endure the afflictions that come upon him, He who created all things, and endued them with power, will assuredly have compassion, and will heal him; and this will He do when He sees the heart of every penitent pure from every evil thing: and it is profitable for you and for your house to suffer affliction now.    location 21546
Hermas, The Shepherd, Book 3, Similitude 7

{Crowns; Rev 2:10}
And the angel of the Lord ordered crowns to be brought; and there were brought crowns, formed, as it were, of palms; and he crowned the men who had returned the branches which had offshoots and some fruit, and sent them away into the tower.    location 21587
Hermas, The Shepherd, Book 3, Similitude 8, ch. 2
{Michael; Jude 1:9; Dan 12:1; Rev 12:7-9}
"This great tree that casts its shadow over plains, and mountains, and all the earth, is the law of God that was given to the whole world; and this law is the Son of God, proclaimed to the ends of the earth; and the people who are under its shadow are they who have heard the proclamation, and have believed upon Him. And the great and glorious angel Michael is he who has authority over this people, and governs them; for this is he who gave them the law into the hearts of believers: he accordingly superintends them to whom he gave it, to see if they have kept the same. And you see the branches of each one, for the branches are the law.    location 21605
Hermas, The Shepherd, Book 3, Similitude 8, ch. 3

{Obedience Necessary for Salvation}
"Who, then," I continued, "are they who were crowned, and who go to the tower?" "These are they who have suffered on account of the law; but the others, and they who returned their branches green, and with offshoots, but without fruit, are they who have been afflicted on account of the law, but who have not suffered nor denied their law; and they who returned their branches green as they had received them, are the venerable, and the just, and they who have walked carefully in a pure heart, and have kept the commandments of the Lord.    location 21612
Hermas, The Shepherd, Book 3, Similitude 8, ch. 3

{Repentance; Heb 10:26-27; Heb 6:4-8}
After the Shepherd had examined the branches of them all, he said to me, "I told you that this tree was tenacious of life. You see," he continued, "how many repented and were saved." "I see, sir," I replied. "That you may behold," he added, "the great mercy of the Lord, that it is great and glorious, and that He has given His Spirit to those who are worthy of repentance." "Why then, sir," I said, "did not all these repent?" He answered, "To them whose heart He saw would become pure, and obedient to Him, He gave power to repent with the whole heart. But to them whose deceit and wickedness He perceived, and saw that they intended to repent hypocritically, He did not grant repentance, lest they should again profane His name."    location 21639
Hermas, The Shepherd, Book 3, Similitude 8, ch. 6

{Eternal Security; Rev 2:5}
But all who will not repent have lost their lives; and as many of them as repented became good, and their dwelling was appointed within the first walls; and some of them ascended even into the tower. You see, then," he said, "that repentance involves life to sinners, but non-repentance death."    location 21652
Hermas, The Shepherd, Book 3, Similitude 8, ch. 6

{Obedience Necessary for Salvation; Mt 22:37-40; Mt 23:23}
Life is the possession of all who keep the commandments of the Lord; but in the commandments there is no rivalry in regard to the first places, or glory of any kind, but in regard to patience and personal humility.    location 21664

{Riches; Mt 19:24}
"And they who returned their branches two-thirds withered and one-third green, are those that were faithful indeed; but after acquiring wealth, and becoming distinguished amongst the heathen, they clothed themselves with great pride, and became lofty-minded, and deserted the truth, and did not cleave to the righteous, but lived with the heathen, and this way of life became more agreeable to them. They did not, however, depart from God, but remained in the faith, although not working the works of faith. Many of them accordingly repented, and their dwelling was in the tower.    location 21677
Hermas, The Shepherd, Book 3, Similitude 8, ch. 9

{Relationship of the Father and the Son; Heb 1:1-2; Prov 8:22-31}
"This rock," he answered, "and this gate are the Son of God." "How, sir?" I said; "the rock is old, and the gate is new." "Listen," he said, "and understand, O ignorant man. The Son of God is older than all His creatures, so that He was a fellow-councillor with the Father in His work of creation: for this reason is He old." "And why is the gate new, sir?" I said. "Because," he answered, "He became manifest in the last days of the dispensation: for this reason the gate was made new, that they who are to be saved by it might enter into the kingdom of God.    location 21867
Hermas, The Shepherd, Book 3, Similitude 9, ch. 12

{Acts 4:12}
man cannot otherwise enter into the kingdom of God than by the name of His beloved Son.    location 21875
Hermas, The Shepherd, Book 3, Similitude 9, ch. 12

{Jn 3:5}
"And the tower," I asked, "what does it mean?" "This tower," he replied, "is the Church." "And these virgins, who are they?" "They are holy spirits, and men cannot otherwise be found in the kingdom of God unless these have put their clothing upon them: for if you receive the name only, and do not receive from them the clothing, they are of no advantage to you. For these virgins are the powers of the Son of God. If you bear His name but possess not His power, it will be in vain that you bear His name. Those stones," he continued, "which you saw rejected bore His name, but did not put on the clothing of the virgins." "Of what nature is their clothing, sir?" I asked. "Their very names," he said, "are their clothing. Everyone who bears the name of the Son of God, ought to bear the names also of these; for the Son Himself bears the names of these virgins.    location 21882
Hermas, The Shepherd, Book 3, Similitude 9, ch. 13

{Eph 4:4-5; 1 Cor 12:13}
So also they who have believed on the Lord through His Son, and are clothed with these spirits, shall become one spirit, one body, and the color of their garments shall be one. And the dwelling of such as bear the names of the virgins is in the tower."    location 21890
Hermas, The Shepherd, Book 3, Similitude 9, ch. 13

{Obedience Necessary for Salvation}
If, then, the whole creation is supported by the Son of God, what think ye of those who are called by Him, and bear the name of the Son of God, and walk in His commandments? do you see what kind of persons He supports? Those who bear His name with their whole heart.    location 21911
Hermas, The Shepherd, Book 3, Similitude 9, ch. 14

{Gal 5:22-23}
"Hear," he said, "the names of the stronger virgins who stood at the corners. The first is Faith, the second Continence, the third Power, the fourth Patience. And the others standing in the midst of these have the following names: Simplicity, Innocence, Purity, Cheerfulness, Truth, Understanding, Harmony, Love. He who bears these names and that of the Son of God will be able to enter into the kingdom of God.    location 21915
Hermas, The Shepherd, Book 3, Similitude 9, ch. 15

{Gal 5:19-21}
Hear, also," he continued, "the names of the women who had the black garments; and of these four are stronger than the rest. The first is Unbelief, the second: Incontinence, the third Disobedience, the fourth Deceit. And their followers are called Sorrow, Wickedness, Wantonness, Anger,    location 21918
Hermas, The Shepherd, Book 3, Similitude 9, ch. 15

{Baptism; Seal}
Accordingly, those also who fell asleep received the seal of the Son of God.    location 21932
Hermas, The Shepherd, Book 3, Similitude 9, ch. 16

{Baptism; Seal}
"before a man bears the name of the Son of God he is dead; but when he receives the seal he lays aside his deadness, and obtains life. The seal, then, is the water: they descend into the water dead, and they arise alive. And to them, accordingly, was this seal preached, and they made use of it that they might enter into the kingdom of God."    location 21932
Hermas, The Shepherd, Book 3, Similitude 9, ch. 16

{Baptism; Hades; 1 Pet 3:19}
"these apostles and teachers who preached the name of the Son of God, after falling asleep in the power and faith of the Son of God, preached it not only to those who were asleep, but themselves also gave them the seal of the preaching. Accordingly they descended with them into the water, and again ascended. [But these descended alive and rose up again alive; whereas they who had previously fallen asleep descended dead, but rose up again alive. ] By these, then, were they quickened and made to know the name of the Son of God. location 21936
Hermas, The Shepherd, Book 3, Similitude 9, ch. 16

{Baptism; Hades; 1 Pet 3:19}
For they slept in righteousness and in great purity, but only they had not this seal. location 21940
Hermas, The Shepherd, Book 3, Similitude 9, ch. 16

{Mt 28:19-20}
"these mountains are the twelve tribes, which inhabit the whole world. The Son of God, accordingly, was preached unto them by the apostles." "But why are the mountains of various kinds, some having one form, and others another? Explain that to me, sir." "Listen," he answered: "these twelve tribes that inhabit the whole world are twelve nations. And they vary in prudence and understanding. As numerous, then, as are the varieties of the mountains which you saw, are also the diversities of mind and understanding among these nations.    location 21944
Hermas, The Shepherd, Book 3, Similitude 9, ch. 17

{Jn 17:11; Jn 17:21-23; Eph 4:4-5}
"explain this: why, when the mountains are so diverse, their stones, when placed in the building, became one color, shining like those also that had ascended out of the pit." "Because," he said, "all the nations that dwell under heaven were called by hearing and believing upon the name of the Son of God. Having, therefore, received the seal, they had one understanding and one mind; and their faith became one, and their love one, and with the name they bore also the spirits of the virgins. On this account the building of the tower became of one color, bright as the sun.    location 21948
Hermas, The Shepherd, Book 3, Similitude 9, ch. 17

{Eternal Security; Heb 10:26-27; Heb 6:4-8}
"He that does not know God," he answered, "and practices evil, receives a certain chastisement for his wickedness; but he that has known God, ought not any longer to do evil, but to do good. If, accordingly, when he ought to do good, he does evil, does not he appear to do greater evil than he who does not know God? For this reason, they who have not known God and do evil are condemned to death; but they who have known God, and have seen His mighty works, and still continue in evil, shall be chastised doubly, and shall die for ever. In this way, then, will the Church of God be purified.    location 21955
Hermas, The Shepherd, Book 3, Similitude 9, ch. 18

{Riches; Mt 13:22; 1 Tim 6:9-10}
"And from the third mountain, which had thorns and thistles, they who believed are the following. There are some of them rich, and others immersed in much business. The thistles are the rich, and the thorns are they who are immersed in much business. Those, accordingly, who are entangled in many various kinds of business, do not cleave to the servants of God, but wander away, being choked by their business transactions; and the rich cleave with difficulty to the servants of God, fearing lest these should ask something of them.    location 21978
Hermas, The Shepherd, Book 3, Similitude 9, ch. 20

{Isa 43:25; Mt 18:21-35}
If our God and Lord, who rules over all things, and has power over all His creation, does not remember evil against those who confess their sins, but is merciful, does man, who is corruptible and full of sins, remember evil against a fellow-man, as if he were able to destroy or to save him?    location 22006
Hermas, The Shepherd, Book 3, Similitude 9, ch. 23

{Mt 28:19-20}
"And they who believed from the eighth mountain, where were the many fountains, and where all the creatures of God drank of the fountains, were the following: apostles, and teachers, who preached to the whole world, and who taught solemnly and purely the word of the Lord, and did not at all fall into evil desires, but walked always in righteousness and truth, according as they had received the Holy Spirit. Such persons, therefore, shall enter in with the angels."    location 22020
Hermas, The Shepherd, Book 3, Similitude 9, ch. 25

{Heb 10:26-27; Heb 6:4-8; Mt 10:33}
These men, therefore, have repentance in their power, unless they are found to have denied from the heart; but if anyone is found to have denied from the heart, I do not know if he may live.    location 22032
Hermas, The Shepherd, Book 3, Similitude 9, ch. 26

{Eternal Security; 2 Pet 2:1; Mt 10:33}
for it is impossible for him to be saved who now intends to deny his Lord; but to those who denied Him long ago, repentance seems to be possible.    location 22034
Hermas, The Shepherd, Book 3, Similitude 9, ch. 26

{1 Tim 3:1-7}
were the following: bishops given to hospitality, who always gladly received into their houses the servants of God, without dissimulation. And the bishops never failed to protect, by their service, the widows, and those who were in want, and always maintained a holy conversation. All these, accordingly, shall be protected by the Lord forever. They who do these things are honourable before God, and their place is already with the angels, if they remain to the end serving God."    location 22041
Hermas, The Shepherd, Book 3, Similitude 9, ch. 27

{Rev 2:10,13; Rev 3:8; Mt 10:22}
"all who once suffered for the name of the Lord are honourable before God; and of all these the sins were remitted, because they suffered for the name of the Son of God. And why their fruits are of various kinds, and some of them superior, listen. All," he continued, "who were brought before the authorities and were examined, and did not deny, but suffered cheerfully-these are held in greater honour with God, and of these the fruit is superior; but all who were cowards, and in doubt, and who reasoned in their hearts whether they would deny or confess, and yet suffered, of these the fruit is less, because that suggestion came into their hearts; for that suggestion-that a servant should deny his Lord-is evil. Have a care, therefore, ye who are planning such things, lest that suggestion remain in your hearts, and ye perish unto God.    location 22048
Hermas, The Shepherd, Book 3, Similitude 9, ch. 28

{Innocence of Children; Mt 18:2-4}
"And they who believed from the twelfth mountain, which was white, are the following: they are as infant children, in whose hearts no evil originates; nor did they know what wickedness is, but always remained as children. Such accordingly, without doubt, dwell in the kingdom of God, because they defiled in nothing the commandments of God; but they remained like children all the days of their life in the same mind. All of you, then, who shall remain stedfast, and be as children, without doing evil, will be more honoured than all who have been previously mentioned; for all infants are honourable before God, and are the first persons with Him. Blessed, then, are ye who put away wickedness from yourselves, and put on innocence. As the first of all will you live unto God."    location 22061
Hermas, The Shepherd, Book 3, Similitude 9, ch. 29

{Obedience Necessary for Salvation}
For if you keep those commandments, every desire and pleasure of the world will be subject to you, and success will attend you in every good work.    location 22120
Hermas, The Shepherd, Book 3, Similitude 10, ch. 1

{Obedience Necessary for Salvation; Mt 7:21-27}
all who follow out his commands shall have life, and great honour with the Lord. But those who do not keep his commandments, flee from his life, and despise him.    location 22130
Hermas, The Shepherd, Book 3, Similitude 10, ch. 2

{Repentance; Obedience Necessary for Salvation; Mt 3:8}
But I enjoin you, that you obey his commands, and you will have a cure for your former sins."    location 22132
Hermas, The Shepherd, Book 3, Similitude 10, ch. 2

{Obedience Necessary for Salvation}
Whoever, therefore, shall walk in these commandments, shall have life, and will be happy in his life; but whosoever shall neglect them shall not have life, and will be unhappy in this life. Enjoin all, who are able to act rightly, not to cease well-doing; for, to practice good works is useful to them.    location 22146
Hermas, The Shepherd, Book 3, Similitude 10, ch. 4

{Mt 7:13-14; Jer 21:8}
1. There are two ways, one of life and one of death; but a great difference between the two ways.    location 137262
Didache, ch. 1

{Mt 22:37-40; Mt 7:12; Tob 4:15}
2. The way of life, then, is this: First, thou shalt love God who made thee; second, thy neighbour as thyself; and all things whatsoever thou wouldst should not occur to thee, thou also to another do not do.    location 137263
Didache, ch. 1

{Mt 5:44-46; Lk 6:27-28; Mt 5:46}
3. And of these sayings the teaching is this: Bless them that curse you, and pray for your enemies, and fast for them that persecute you. For what thank is there, if ye love them that love you? Do not also the Gentiles do the same? But do ye love them that hate you; and ye shall not have an enemy. 
Didache, ch. 1

{1 Pet 2:11}
4. Abstain thou from fleshly and worldly lusts.    location 137264
Didache, ch. 1

{Mt 5:39-41}
If one give thee a blow upon thy right cheek, turn to him the other also; and thou shalt be perfect. If one impress thee for one mile, go with him two. If one take away thy cloak, give him also thy coat. If one take from thee thine own, ask it not back, for indeed thou art not able. 
Didache, ch. 1


{Lk 6:30}
5. Give to everyone that asketh thee, and ask it not back; for the Father willeth that to all should be given of our own blessings (free gifts). Happy is he that giveth according to the commandment; for he is guiltless.    location 137267
Didache, ch. 1

{Mt 5:25-26; Mt 5:42}
Woe to him that receiveth; for if one having need receiveth, he is guiltless; but he that receiveth not having need, shall pay the penalty, why he received and for what, and, coming into straits (confinement), he shall be examined concerning the things which he hath done, and he shall not escape thence until he pay back the last farthing.    location 137270
Didache, ch. 1

{Mt 5:42; Sir 12:1}
6. But also now concerning this, it hath been said, Let thine alms sweat in thy hands, until thou know to whom thou shouldst give.    location 137272
Didache, ch. 1

{Ex 20:13-15; Ex 20:14; Abortion}
2. Thou shalt not commit murder, thou shalt not commit adultery, thou shalt not commit paederasty, thou shalt not commit fornication, thou shalt not steal, thou shalt not practice magic, thou shalt not practice witchcraft, thou shalt not murder a child by abortion nor kill that which is begotten. location 137275
Didache, ch. 2

{Ex 20:17}
Thou shalt not covet the things of thy neighbour, 
Didache, ch. 2

{Lev 19:12; Ex 20:16}
3. thou shalt not forswear thyself, thou shalt not bear false witness, thou shalt not speak evil, thou shalt bear no grudge. location 137277
Didache, ch. 2

{Heb 13:7-21; Mt 10:40; 1 Cor 1:10-13}
2. And thou shalt seek out day by day the faces of the saints, in order that thou mayest rest upon their words. 3. Thou shalt not long for division, but shalt bring those who contend to peace.    location 137295
Didache, ch. 4

{Mt 5:42; Sir 4:31}
5. Be not a stretcher forth of the hands to receive and a drawer of them back to give.    location 137297
Didache, ch. 4

{Alms; Mt 6:1-4; Sir 4:5; Tob 4:7-11}
6. If thou hast aught, through thy hands thou shalt give ransom for thy sins. 7. Thou shalt not hesitate to give, nor murmur when thou givest; for thou shalt know who is the good repayer of the hire. 8. Thou shalt not turn away from him that is in want, but thou shalt share all things with thy brother, and shalt not say that they are thine own; for if ye are partakers in that which is immortal, how much more in things which are mortal? location 137298
Didache, ch. 4

{Prov 13:24; Prov 23:13-14; Prov 29:15; Eph 6:4}
Thou shalt not remove thy hand from thy son or from thy daughter, but from their youth shalt teach them the fear of God.    location 137301
Didache, ch. 4

{Eph 6:5-8; Col 3:22; 1 Tim 6:1}
And ye bondmen shall be subject to your masters as to a type of God, in modesty and fear.    location 137303
Didache, ch. 4

{Jas 5:16; Mt 5:23-24; 1 Cor 11:28-31}
In the church thou shalt acknowledge thy transgressions, and thou shalt not come near for thy prayer with an evil conscience.    location 137305
Didache, ch. 4

{Jas 5:1-6}
advocates of the rich, lawless judges of the poor, utter sinners. Be delivered, children, from all these.    location 137314
Didache, ch. 5

{Acts 15:20; 1 Cor  8:1-13; Rev 2:14}
but against that which is sacrificed to idols be exceedingly on thy guard; for it is the service of dead gods.    location 137318
Didache, ch. 6

{Baptism; Matt 28:19,20; Living Water}
1. And concerning baptism, thus baptize ye: Having first said all these things, baptize into the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit, in living water. 2. But if thou have not living water, baptize into other water; and if thou canst not in cold, in warm. 3. But if thou have not either, pour out water thrice upon the head into the name of Father and Son and Holy Spirit. 4. But before the baptism let the baptizer fast, and the baptized, and whatever others can; but thou shalt order the baptized to fast one or two days before.    location 137320
Didache, ch. 7

{Fasting; Apostolic Traditions; Lord's Prayer; Mt 6:16-18}
1. But let not your fasts be with the hypocrites; for they fast on the second and fifth day of the week; but do ye fast on the fourth day and the Preparation (Friday). 2. Neither pray as the hypocrites; but as the Lord commanded in His Gospel, thus pray: Our Father who art in heaven, hallowed be Thy name.    location 137325
Didache, ch. 8

{Communion; Mt 22:17-20}
1. Now concerning the Thanksgiving (Eucharist), thus give thanks. 2. First, concerning the cup: We thank thee, our Father,    location 137331
Didache, ch. 9

{Communion}
And concerning the broken bread: We thank Thee, our Father, for the life   location 137333
Didache, ch. 9

{Relationship of the Father and the Son}
knowledge which Thou madest known to us through Jesus Thy Servant; to Thee be the glory forever.    location 137333
Didache, ch. 9

{Communion; Lord's Prayer; Mt 6:13; Mt 5:14; Jn 11:52; Jn 10:16}
Even as this broken bread was scattered over the hills, and was gathered together and became one, so let Thy Church be gathered together from the ends of the earth into Thy kingdom; for Thine is the glory and the power through Jesus Christ forever.    location 137334
Didache, ch. 9

{Communion; 1 Cor 11:23-31; Mt 7:6}
But let no one eat or drink of your Thanksgiving (Eucharist), but they who have been baptized into the name of the Lord; for concerning this also the Lord hath said, Give not that which is holy to the dogs.    location 137336
Didache, ch. 9

{Communion; Jn 17:11; Jn 17:26}
1. But after ye are filled, thus give thanks: 2. We thank Thee, holy Father,    location 137339
Didache, ch. 10

{Relationship of the Father and the Son}
Thou madest known to us through Jesus Thy Servant; to Thee be the glory for ever.    location 137340
Didache, ch. 10

{Communion; Jn 6:58}
but to us Thou didst freely give spiritual food and drink and life eternal through Thy Servant.    location 137342
Didache, ch. 10

{1 Jn 2:5; Mt 24:31}
Remember, Lord, Thy Church, to deliver it from all evil and to make it perfect in Thy love, and gather it from the four winds, sanctified for Thy kingdom which Thou hast prepared for it;    location 137343
Didache, ch. 10

{Prophets, Christian}
But permit the prophets to make Thanksgiving as much as they desire.    location 137346
Didache, ch. 10

{1 Tim 1:3; 1 Tim 6:3; 2 Jn 10; 2 Pet 2:1}
1. Whosoever, therefore, cometh and teacheth you all these things that have been said before, receive him. 2. But if the teacher himself turn and teach another doctrine to the destruction of this, hear him not;    location 137348
Didache, ch. 11

{Prophets, Christian}
{Mt 10:5-12}
But concerning the apostles and prophets, according to the decree of the Gospel, thus do. 4. Let every apostle that cometh to you be received as the Lord. 5. But he shall not remain except one day; but if there be need, also the next; but if he remain three days, he is a false prophet.    location 137350
Didache, ch. 11

{Prophet: What Constitutes a True Prophet}
{Mt 10:9-10; 1 Cor 14:29; Mt 7:15-23}
6. And when the apostle goes away, let him take nothing but bread until he lodgeth; but if he ask money, he is a false prophet.    location 137352
Didache, ch. 11

{Prophet: What Constitutes a True Prophet}
{Mt 12:31; 1 Cor 14:29}
And every prophet that speaketh in the Spirit ye shall neither try nor judge; for every sin shall be forgiven, but this sin shall not be forgiven. 8. But not everyone that speaketh in the Spirit is a prophet; but only if he hold the ways of the Lord.    location 137353
Didache, ch. 11

{Prophet: What Constitutes a True Prophet}
{Mt 7:15-23; 1 Cor 14:29}
and every prophet who teacheth the truth, if he do not what he teacheth, is a false prophet.    location 137356
Didache, ch. 11

{2 Thess 3:10}
1. But let everyone that cometh in the name of the Lord be received, and afterward ye shall prove and know him; for ye shall have understanding right and left. 2. If he who cometh is a wayfarer, assist him as far as ye are able; but he shall not remain with you, except for two or three days, if need be.  ... But if he willeth to abide with you, being an artisan, let him work and eat; but if he hath no trade, 4. according to your understanding see to it that, as a Christian, he shall not live with you idle. 5.    location 137363
Didache, ch. 12

{Prophets, Christian}
{1 Cor 9:9; 1 Tim 5:18; Ex 22:29; Deut 18:3-4}
1. But every true prophet that willeth to abide among you is worthy of his support. 2. So also a true teacher is himself worthy, as the workman, of his support. 3. Every first-fruit, therefore, of the products of wine-press and threshing-floor, of oxen and of sheep, thou shalt take and give to the prophets, for they are your high priests. ... But if ye have not a prophet, give it to the poor.    location 137368
Didache, ch. 13

{Prophets, Christian}
{1 Cor 9:9; 1 Tim 5:18}
thou openest a jar of wine or of oil, take the first-fruit and give it to the prophets; location 137369
Didache, ch. 13

{Communion; Acts 20:7; 1 Cor 11:27-29; 1 Cor 16:2}
But every Lord's day do ye gather yourselves together, and break bread, and give thanksgiving after having confessed your transgressions, that your sacrifice may be pure.    location 137372
Didache, ch. 14

{Mt 5:23-24; 1 Cor 11:27-29}
But let no one that is at variance with his fellow come together with you, until they be reconciled, that your sacrifice may not be profaned.    location 137374
Didache, ch. 14

{Mal 1:11; 1 Cor 11:27-29}
For this is that which was spoken by the Lord: In every place and time offer to me a pure sacrifice;    location 137375
Didache, ch. 14

{1 Tim 3:3-8; Titus 1:7-9; Heb 13:17; 1 Tim 5:17; Church Government}
Appoint, therefore, for yourselves, bishops and deacons worthy of the Lord, men meek, and not lovers of money, and truthful and proved; ... they also render to you the service of prophets and teachers. 2. Despise them not therefore, for they are your honoured ones, together with the prophets and teachers.   location 137378
Didache, ch. 15

{Mt 24:42-44; Lk 12:35}
Watch for your life's sake. Let not your lamps be quenched, nor your loins unloosed; but be ye ready, for ye know not the hour in which our Lord cometh.    location 137383
Didache, ch. 16

{Heb 10:25}
But often shall ye come together, seeking the things which are befitting to your souls. location 137384
Didache, ch. 16

{Eternal Security; Great Tribulation; Mt 24:10-13}
Then shall the creation of men come into the fire of trial, and many shall be made to stumble and shall perish; but they that endure in their faith shall be saved from under the curse itself. 6. And then shall appear the signs of the truth;    location 137388
Didache, ch. 16

{Antoninus Pius}
To the Emperor Titus Aelius Adrianus Antoninus Pius    location 5345
         Justin Martyr, First Apology, Ch. 1

{Jn 15:18-25; Mt 10:22}
present this address and petition in behalf of those of all nations who are unjustly hated and wantonly abused, myself being one of them.    location 5347
         Justin Martyr, First Apology, Ch. 1

{Phil 4:8; 2 Thess 2:10}
Reason directs those who are truly pious and philosophical to honour and love only what is true, declining to follow traditional opinions, if these be worthless. location 5350
         Justin Martyr, First Apology, Ch. 2

{Mt 10:28}
you can kill, but not hurt us.    location 5357
         Justin Martyr, First Apology, Ch. 2

{Mt 10:32-33}
if any of the accused deny the name, and say that he is not a Christian, you acquit him, as having no evidence against him as a wrong-doer; but if any one acknowledge that he is a Christian, you punish him on account of this acknowledgment.    location 5377
        Justin Martyr, First Apology, Ch. 4

{Demons; Pagan Religion}
being carried away by fear, and not knowing that these were demons, they called them gods, and gave to each the name which each of the demons chose for himself. And when Socrates endeavoured, by true reason and examination, to bring these things to light, and deliver men from the demons,    location 5391
        Justin Martyr, First Apology, Ch. 5

{False Charges Against Christians}
Hence are we called atheists. And we confess that we are atheists, so far as gods of this sort are concerned, but not with respect to the most true God, the Father of righteousness and temperance and the other virtues, who is free from all impurity. But both Him, and the Son (who came forth from Him and taught us these things,    location 5399
Justin Martyr, First Apology, Ch.6

{Prov 14:5; Jn 8:44; Col 3:9; Rev 2:10}
it is in our power, when we are examined, to deny that we are Christians; but we would not live by telling a lie.    location 5414
Justin Martyr, First Apology, Ch.8

{Phil 1:21-23; 1 Pet 1:6-7}
For, impelled by the desire of the eternal and pure life, we seek the abode that is with God, the Father and Creator of all, and hasten to confess our faith, persuaded and convinced as we are that they who have proved to God by their works that they followed Him, and loved to abide with Him where there is no sin to cause disturbance, can obtain these things.    location 5415
Justin Martyr, First Apology, Ch.8

{Mt 25:46; Dan 12:2}
which are now to undergo everlasting punishment;    location 5420
Justin Martyr, First Apology, Ch.8

{Pagan Religion}
that you should appoint such men the guardians of the temples where they are enshrined; not recognizing that it is unlawful even to think or say that men are the guardians of gods.    location 5431
Justin Martyr, First Apology, Ch.9

{2 Pet 1:5-8}
And we have been taught, and are convinced, and do believe, that He accepts those only who imitate the excellences which reside in Him, temperance, and justice, and philanthropy, and as many virtues as are peculiar to a God who is called by no proper name.    location 5435
Justin Martyr, First Apology, Ch.10

{Rev 2:26-27}
and if men by their works show themselves worthy of this His design, they are deemed worthy, and so we have received-of reigning in company with Him, being delivered from corruption and suffering.    location 5437
Justin Martyr, First Apology, Ch.10

{Jn 18:36; Rom 14:17}
And when you hear that we look for a kingdom, you suppose, without making any inquiry, that we speak of a human kingdom; whereas we speak of that which is with God,    location 5446
Justin Martyr, First Apology, Ch.11

{Heb 13:13-14; Phil 3:20; Heb 11:16}
For if we looked for a human kingdom, we should also deny our Christ, that we might not be slain;    location 5449
Justin Martyr, First Apology, Ch.11

{Col 3:1-4; Heb 9:27}
But since our thoughts are not fixed on the present, we are not concerned when men cut us off; since also death is a debt which must at all events be paid.    location 5450
Justin Martyr, First Apology, Ch.11

{1 Tim 2:1; Rom 13:1}
And more than all other men are we your helpers and allies in promoting peace,    location 5452
Justin Martyr, First Apology, Ch.12

{Rom 2:6-10}
each man goes to everlasting punishment or salvation according to the value of his actions. For if all men knew this, no one would choose wickedness even for a little, knowing that he goes to the everlasting punishment of fire; but would by all means restrain himself, and adorn himself with virtue, that he might obtain the good gifts of God, and escape the punishments.    location 5454
Justin Martyr, First Apology, Ch.12

{Rom 13:3-4}
But you seem to fear lest all men become righteous, and you no longer have any to punish. Such would be the concern of public executioners, but not of good princes.    location 5460
Justin Martyr, First Apology, Ch.12

{Jn 8:44; 1 Kings 22:21-22}
But, as we before said, we are persuaded that these things are prompted by evil spirits, who demand sacrifices and service even from those who live unreasonably;    location 5461
Justin Martyr, First Apology, Ch.12

{Rev 17:14; Rev 19:16}
the Word, than whom, after God who begat Him, we know there is no ruler more kingly and just. For    location 5464
Justin Martyr, First Apology, Ch.12

{Acts 11:26; Lk 24:44; Acts 1:8; Jn 14:25-26}
Jesus Christ; from whom also we have the name of Christians. Whence we become more assured of all the things He taught us, since whatever He beforehand foretold should come to pass, is seen in fact coming to pass;    location 5467
Justin Martyr, First Apology, Ch.12

{Heb 10:4-14}
He has no need of streams of blood and libations and incense;    location 5474
Justin Martyr, First Apology, Ch.13

{Mt 16:16-17; 1 Cor 1:22-24; 1 Cor 2:7-10}
we reasonably worship Him, having learned that He is the Son of the true God Himself, and holding Him in the second place, and the prophetic Spirit in the third, we will prove. For they proclaim our madness to consist in this, that we give to a crucified man a place second to the unchangeable and eternal God, the Creator of all; for they do not discern the mystery that is herein,    location 5480
Justin Martyr, First Apology, Ch.13

{Jn 1:18}
follow the only unbegotten God through His Son    location 5488
Justin Martyr, First Apology, Ch.14

{Acts 2:44-45; Acts 4:34-35; Titus 3:3-5; Mt 5:44; 1 Pet 3:9; 1 Pet 3:14-16}
we who valued above all things the acquisition of wealth and possessions, now bring what we have into a common stock, and communicate to every one in need; we who hated and destroyed one another, and on account of their different manners would not live with men of a different tribe, now, since the coming of Christ, live familiarly with them, and pray for our enemies, and endeavour to persuade those who hate us unjustly to live conformably to the good precepts of Christ, to the end that they may become partakers with us of the same joyful hope of a reward from God the ruler of all.    location 5489
Justin Martyr, First Apology, Ch.14

{Mt 5:27-32; Heb 4:13}
So that all who, by human law, are twice married, are in the eye of our Master sinners, and those who look upon a woman to lust after her. For not only he who in act commits adultery is rejected by Him, but also he who desires to commit adultery: since not only our works, but also our thoughts, are open before God.    location 5502
 Justin Martyr, First Apology, Ch.15

{Acts 26:17-18; Titus 2:11-14}
And many, both men and women, who have been Christ's disciples from childhood, remain pure at the age of sixty or seventy years; and I boast that I could produce such from every race of men.    location 5504
Justin Martyr, First Apology, Ch.15

{Lk 5:32; Rom 2:4; 2 Pet 3:9}
For Christ called not the just nor the chaste to repentance, but the ungodly, and the licentious, and the unjust; His words being, "I came not to call the righteous, but sinners to repentance." For the heavenly Father desires rather the repentance than the punishment of the sinner.    location 5506
Justin Martyr, First Apology, Ch.15

{1 Pet 2:12; 1 Pet 3:9; Rom 12:21}
And this indeed is proved in the case of many who once were of your way of thinking, but have changed their violent and tyrannical disposition, being overcome either by the constancy which they have witnessed in their neighbours' lives, or by the extraordinary forbearance they have observed in their fellow-travellers when defrauded, or by the honesty of those with whom they have transacted business.    location 5525
Justin Martyr, First Apology, Ch.16

{Mt 5:34-37}
And with regard to our not swearing at all, and always speaking the truth, He enjoined as follows: "Swear not at all; but let your yea be yea, and your nay, nay; for whatsoever is more than these cometh of evil."    location 5528
Justin Martyr, First Apology, Ch.16

{Mt 7:21; Jas 2:26}
And let those who are not found living as He taught, be understood to be no Christians, even though they profess with the lip the precepts of Christ; for not those who make profession, but those who do the works, shall be saved, according to His word: "Not every one who saith to Me, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the kingdom of heaven, but he that doeth the will of My Father which is in heaven.    location 5532
Justin Martyr, First Apology, Ch.16

{Mt 3:10; Mt 7:19}
By their works ye shall know them. And every tree that bringeth not forth good fruit, is hewn down and cast into the fire."    location 5538
Justin Martyr, First Apology, Ch.16

{Rom 13:6-7}
And everywhere we, more readily than all men, endeavour to pay to those appointed by you the taxes both ordinary and extraordinary, as we have been taught by Him;    location 5541
Justin Martyr, First Apology, Ch.17

{1 Tim 2:1; 1 Pet 2:13-14}
Whence to God alone we render worship, but in other things we gladly serve you, acknowledging you as kings and rulers of men, and praying that with your kingly power you be found to possess also sound judgment.    location 5545
Justin Martyr, First Apology, Ch.17

{Lk 12:48; Rom 2:6-8; 2 Cor 5:10}
But if you pay no regard to our prayers and frank explanations, we shall suffer no loss, since we believe (or rather, indeed, are persuaded) that every man will suffer punishment in eternal fire according to the merit of his deed, and will render account according to the power he has received from God, as Christ intimated when He said, "To whom God has given more, of him shall more be required."    location 5546
Justin Martyr, First Apology, Ch.17

{2 Pet 3:7; 2 Thess 1:8-9}
For reflect upon the end of each of the preceding kings, how they died the death common to all, which, if it issued in insensibility, would be a godsend to all the wicked. But since sensation remains to all who have ever lived, and eternal punishment is laid up (i.e., for the wicked),    location 5550
Justin Martyr, First Apology, Ch.18

{Lk 16:23-28}
these persuade you that even after death souls are in a state of sensation; and those who are seized and cast about by the spirits of the dead, whom all call daemoniacs or madmen;    location 5555
Justin Martyr, First Apology, Ch.18

{1 Cor 15:42-53; 2 Cor 5:1-4}
Such favour as you grant to these, grant also to us, who not less but more firmly than they believe in God; since we expect to receive again our own bodies, though they be dead and cast into the earth, for we maintain that with God nothing is impossible.    location 5558
Justin Martyr, First Apology, Ch.18

{1 Cor 15:35-49}
if you yourselves were not such as you now are, and born of such parents [and causes], and one were to show you human seed and a picture of a man, and were to say with confidence that from such a substance such a being could be produced, would you believe before you saw the actual production?    location 5563
Justin Martyr, First Apology, Ch.19

{1 Cor 15:35-49}
it is not impossible that the bodies of men, after they have been dissolved, and like seeds resolved into earth, should in God's appointed time rise again and put on incorruption.    location 5567
Justin Martyr, First Apology, Ch.19

{2 Thess 1:9; Rev 19:20}
And hell is a place where those are to be punished who have lived wickedly, and who do not believe that those things which God has taught us by Christ will come to pass.    location 5574
Justin Martyr, First Apology, Ch.19

{Rom 2:9-15; Lk 16:19-30}
and while we affirm that the souls of the wicked, being endowed with sensation even after death, are punished, and that those of the good being delivered from punishment spend a blessed existence, we shall seem to say the same things as the poets and philosophers;    location 5582
Justin Martyr, First Apology, Ch.20

{1 Cor 15:32}
and while we maintain that men ought not to worship the works of their hands, we say the very things which have been said by the comic poet Menander,    location 5584
Justin Martyr, First Apology, Ch.20

{Col 1:15; I Cor 15:3-4}
And when we say also that the Word, who is the first-birth of God, was produced without sexual union, and that He, Jesus Christ, our Teacher, was crucified and died, and rose again, and ascended into heaven, we propound nothing different from what you believe regarding those whom you esteem sons of Jupiter.    location 5587
Justin Martyr, First Apology, Ch.21

{2 Thess 1:8-9; Heb 10:27}
we believe that those who live wickedly and do not repent are punished in everlasting fire.    location 5601
Justin Martyr, First Apology, Ch.21

{Lk 1:35; Jn 1:1; Relationship of the Father and Son}
And if we assert that the Word of God was born of God in a peculiar manner, different from ordinary generation, let this, as said above, be no extraordinary thing to you, who say that Mercury is the angelic word of God.    location 5604
Justin Martyr, First Apology, Ch.22

{Mt 1:20-23}
And if we even affirm that He was born of a virgin, accept this in common with what you accept of Perseus.    location 5609
Justin Martyr, First Apology, Ch.22

{Jn 1:1; Jn 1:14; Col 1:15}
Jesus Christ is the only proper Son who has been begotten by God, being His Word and first-begotten, and power; and, becoming man according to His will,    location 5615
Justin Martyr, First Apology, Ch.23

{Pagan Poets}
that before He became a man among men, some, influenced by the demons before mentioned, related beforehand, through the instrumentality of the poets, those circumstances as having really happened, which, having fictitiously devised, they narrated,    location 5617
Justin Martyr, First Apology, Ch.23

{2 Cor 1:8-10}
through Jesus Christ, learned to despise these, though we be threatened with death for it, and have dedicated ourselves to the unbegotten and impossible God;    location 5631
Justin Martyr, First Apology, Ch.25

{Acts 8:9-24}
There was a Samaritan, Simon, a native of the village called Gitto, who in the reign of Claudius Caesar, and in your royal city of Rome, did mighty acts of magic, by virtue of the art of the devils operating in him.    location 5638
Justin Martyr, First Apology, Ch.26

{Acts 8:9-24}
He was considered a god, and as a god was honoured by you with a statue, which statue was erected on the river Tiber, between the two bridges, and bore this inscription, in the language of Rome:-"Simoni Deo Sancto," "To Simon the holy God." And almost all the Samaritans, and a few even of other nations, worship him, and acknowledge him as the first god;    location 5640
Justin Martyr, First Apology, Ch.26

{Acts 8:9-24}
Menander, also a Samaritan, of the town Capparetaea, a disciple of Simon, and inspired by devils, we know to have deceived many while he was in Antioch by his magical art. He persuaded those who adhered to him that they should never die, and even now there are some living who hold this opinion of his.    location 5643
Justin Martyr, First Apology, Ch.26

{1 Jn 2:18; 1 Jn 4:1-3; 2 Jn 7}
And there is Marcion, a man of Pontus, who is even at this day alive, and teaching his disciples to believe in some other god greater than the Creator.    location 5645
Justin Martyr, First Apology, Ch.26

{1 Jn 2:19}
All who take their opinions from these men, are, as we before said, called Christians; just as also those who do not agree with the philosophers in their doctrines, have yet in common with them the name of philosophers given to them. And whether they perpetrate those fabulous and shameful deeds-the upsetting of the lamp, and promiscuous intercourse, and eating human flesh-we know not; but we do know that they are neither persecuted nor put to death by you, at least on account of their opinions.    location 5648
Justin Martyr, First Apology, Ch.26

{Exposing Infants; Mt 19:13-15}
But as for us, we have been taught that to expose newly-born children is the part of wicked men;    location 5653
Justin Martyr, First Apology, Ch.27

{Exposing Infants; Rom 1:29-32; 2 Tim 3:1-4}
first, because we see that almost all so exposed (not only the girls, but also the males) are brought up to prostitution.    location 5655
Justin Martyr, First Apology, Ch.27

{Rom 1:29-32}
so now we see you rear children only for this shameful use; and for this pollution a multitude of females and hermaphrodites, and those who commit unmentionable iniquities, are found in every nation.    location 5656
Justin Martyr, First Apology, Ch.27

{2 Pet 2:6-10; Jude 7}
And any one who uses such persons, besides the godless and infamous and impure intercourse, may possibly be having intercourse with his own child, or relative, or brother. And there are some who prostitute even their own children    location 5658
Justin Martyr, First Apology, Ch.27

{Rom 1:26-28}
and some are openly mutilated for the purpose of sodomy;    location 5660
Justin Martyr, First Apology, Ch.27

{Rom 1:32; 1 Pet 4:3-4}
Indeed, the things which you do openly and with applause, as if the divine light were overturned and extinguished, these you lay to our charge;    location 5661
Justin Martyr, First Apology, Ch.27

{Rev 19:20; Rev 20:10}
And that he would be sent into the fire with his host, and the men who follow him, and would be punished for an endless duration, Christ foretold.    location 5666
Justin Martyr, First Apology, Ch.28

{2 Pet 3:9}
For the reason why God has delayed to do this, is His regard for the human race. For He foreknows that some are to be saved by repentance, some even that are perhaps not yet born.    location 5666
Justin Martyr, First Apology, Ch.28

{Gen 1:27}
In the beginning He made the human race with the power of thought and of choosing the truth and doing right, so that all men are without excuse before God; for they have been born rational and contemplative.    location 5668
Justin Martyr, First Apology, Ch.28

{Exposing Infants; Ex 20:13}
And again [we fear to expose children], lest some of them be not picked up, but die, and we become murderers.    location 5673
Justin Martyr, First Apology, Ch.29

{1 Cor 7:35}
whether we marry, it is only that we may bring up children; or whether we decline marriage, we live continently.    location 5674
Justin Martyr, First Apology, Ch.29

{Septuagint; Mt 2:1; Lk 1:5}
when Ptolemy king of Egypt formed a library, and endeavored to collect the writings of all men, he heard also of these prophets, and sent to Herod, who was at that time king of the Jews, requesting that the books of the prophets be sent to him. ...[He] commissioned to translate them into the Greek language. And when this was done, the books  remained with the Egyptians, where they are until now. They are also in the possession of all  Jews throughout the world;    location 5689, 5693
       Justin Martyr, First Apology, Ch.31

{Acts 23:12-35; 2 Cor 11:26; Acts 9:23; Acts 13:45; Acts 13:50; Acts 14:5; 
Acts 17:5; Acts 17:13; Acts 18:12; Acts 20:3; Acts 20:19}
count us foes and enemies; and, like yourselves, they kill and punish us whenever they have the power, as you can well believe. For in the Jewish war which lately raged, Barchochebas, the leader of the revolt of the Jews, gave orders that Christians alone should be led to cruel punishments, unless they would deny Jesus Christ and utter blasphemy.    location 5694
Justin Martyr, First Apology, Ch.31

{1 Pet 1:10-12; Lk 24:44}
And He was predicted before He appeared, first 5000 years before, and again 3000, then 2000, then 1000, and yet again 800; for in the succession of generations prophets after prophets arose.    location 5700
Justin Martyr, First Apology, Ch.31

{Gen 49:10}
And the prophecy, "He shall be the expectation of the nations," signified that there would be some of all nations who should look for Him to come again.    location 5709
Justin Martyr, First Apology, Ch.32

{Gen 49:11}
the prophecy, "binding His foal to the vine, and washing His robe in the blood of the grape," was a significant symbol of the things that were to happen to Christ, and of what He was to do. For the foal of an ass stood bound to a vine at the entrance of a village, and He ordered His acquaintances to bring it to Him then; and when it was brought, He mounted and sat upon it, and entered Jerusalem,    location 5712
Justin Martyr, First Apology, Ch.32

{Gen 49:11; Lk 24:44}
For this "washing His robe in the blood of the grape" was predictive of the passion He was to endure, cleansing by His blood those who believe on Him.    location 5716
Justin Martyr, First Apology, Ch.32

{Gen 49:11; 1 Jn 3:9}
For what is called by the Divine Spirit through the prophet "His robe," are those men who believe in Him in whom abideth the seed of God, the Word. And what is spoken of as "the blood of the grape," signifies that He who should appear would have blood, though not of the seed of man, but of the power of God.    location 5717
Justin Martyr, First Apology, Ch.32

{Jn 1:1; Relationship of the Father and Son}
And the first power after God the Father and Lord of all is the Word, who is also the Son;    location 5719
Justin Martyr, First Apology, Ch.32

{Col 1:15; Lk 1:35; Isa 7:14}
It is wrong, therefore, to understand the Spirit and the power of God as anything else than the Word, who is also the first-born of God, as the foresaid prophet Moses declared; and it was this which, when it came upon the virgin and overshadowed her, caused her to conceive, not by intercourse, but by power.    location 5737
Justin Martyr, First Apology, Ch.33

{Mt 1:21}
And the name Jesus in the Hebrew language means Soter (Saviour) in the Greek tongue.    location 5739
Justin Martyr, First Apology, Ch.33

{Isa 9:6-7}
"Unto us a child is born, and unto us a young man is given, and the government shall be upon His shoulders;" which is significant of the power of the cross, for to it, when He was crucified, He applied His shoulders,    location 5749
Justin Martyr, First Apology, Ch.35

{Ps 22:16}
And the expression, "They pierced my hands and my feet," was used in reference to the nails of the cross which were fixed in His hands and feet.    location 5756
Justin Martyr, First Apology, Ch.35

{2 Pet 1:19-21}
the Divine Word who moves them. For sometimes He declares things that are to come to pass, in the manner of one who foretells the future; sometimes He speaks as from the person of God the Lord and Father of all; sometimes as from the person of Christ; sometimes as from the person of the people answering the Lord or His Father, just as you can see even in your own writers, one man being the writer of the whole, but introducing the persons who converse.    location 5763
Justin Martyr, First Apology, Ch.36

{Rom 10:21; Isa 65:2}
"I have spread out My hands to a disobedient and gainsaying people,    location 5780
Justin Martyr, First Apology, Ch.38

{Isa 50:6}
"I gave My back to the scourges, and My cheeks to the buffetings;    location 5780
Justin Martyr, First Apology, Ch.38

{Mk 15:29-32}
And again, when He says, "They spake with their lips, they wagged the head, saying, Let Him deliver Himself."    location 5783
Justin Martyr, First Apology, Ch.38

{Acts 4:13; Acts 6:10; Titus 3:2-3}
For from Jerusalem there went out into the world, men, twelve in number, and these illiterate, of no ability in speaking: but by the power of God they proclaimed to every race of men that they were sent by Christ to teach to all the word of God; and we who formerly used to murder one another do not only now refrain from making war upon our enemies, but also, that we may not lie nor deceive our examiners, willingly die confessing Christ.    location 5791
Justin Martyr, First Apology, Ch.39

{Skip}
 "The Lord hath reigned from the tree."    location 5826
Justin Martyr, First Apology, Ch.41

{Isa 46:10}
The things which He absolutely knows will take place, He predicts as if already they had taken place.    location 5829
Justin Martyr, First Apology, Ch.42

{Acts 2:25; Acts 2:34-35; Acts 4:25-26}
The words cited above, David uttered 1500 years before Christ became a man and was crucified; and no one of those who lived before Him, nor yet of His contemporaries, afforded joy to the Gentiles by being crucified.    location 5831
Justin Martyr, First Apology, Ch.42

{Acts 17:18; Rom 2:6-8}
But lest some suppose, from what has been said by us, that we say that whatever happens, happens by a fatal necessity, because it is foretold as known beforehand, this too we explain. We have learned from the prophets, and we hold it to be true, that punishments, and chastisements, and good rewards, are rendered according to the merit of each man's actions. Since if it be not so, but all things happen by fate, neither is anything at all in our own power.    location 5835
Justin Martyr, First Apology, Ch.43

{Rom 2:6-11}
For if it be fated that this man, e.g., be good, and this other evil, neither is the former meritorious nor the latter to be blamed. And again, unless the human race have the power of avoiding evil and choosing good by free choice, they are not accountable for their actions, of whatever kind they be. But that it is by free choice they both walk uprightly and stumble, we thus demonstrate. We see the same man making a transition to opposite things. Now, if it had been fated that he were to be either good or bad, he could never have been capable of both the opposites,    location 5838
Justin Martyr, First Apology, Ch.43

{Rom 2:6-11; Rev 22:11-12}
But this we assert is inevitable fate, that they who choose the good have worthy rewards, and they who choose the opposite have their merited awards. For not like other things, as trees and quadrupeds, which cannot act by choice, did God make man: for neither would he be worthy of reward or praise did he not of himself choose the good, but were created for this end; nor, if he were evil, would he be worthy of punishment, not being evil of himself, but being able to be nothing else than what he was made.    location 5845
Justin Martyr, First Apology, Ch.43

{Isa 1:16-20}
"Wash you, make you clean; put away evils from your souls; learn to do well; judge the orphan, and plead for the widow: and come and let us reason together, saith the Lord: And if your sins be as scarlet, I will make them white as wool; and if they be red like as crimson, I will make them white as snow. And if ye be willing and obey Me, ye shall eat the good of the land; but if ye do not obey Me, the sword shall devour you: for the mouth of the Lord hath spoken it."    location 5852
Justin Martyr, First Apology, Ch.44

{Gal 6:7-8; Deut 28:1-68; Plato}
And so, too, Plato, when he says, "The blame is his who chooses, and God is blameless*," [Rep. x] took this from the prophet Moses and uttered it. For Moses is more ancient than all the Greek writers.    location 5858
Justin Martyr, First Apology, Ch.44

{Acts 17:26-30; Rom 1:19-20}
they have received such suggestions from the prophets as have enabled them to understand and interpret these things. And hence there seem to be seeds of truth among all men; but they are charged with not accurately understanding [the truth] when they assert contradictories.    location 5860
Justin Martyr, First Apology, Ch.44

{Ps 139:4; Ps 139:16; 1 Pet 1:20; Acts 2:23; Acts 4:28; Eph 1:4; Rom 2:6-11; 
Gal 6:10}
So that what we say about future events being foretold, we do not say it as if they came about by a fatal necessity; but God foreknowing all that shall be done by all men, and it being His decree that the future actions of men shall all be recompensed according to their several value, He foretells by the Spirit of prophecy that He will bestow meet rewards according to the merit of the actions done, always urging the human race to effort and recollection, showing that He cares and provides for men.    location 5862
Justin Martyr, First Apology, Ch.44

{Sibyl}
But by the agency of the devils death has been decreed against those who read the books of Hystaspes, or of the Sibyl, or of the prophets,    location 5866
Justin Martyr, First Apology, Ch.44

{1 Thess 1:6}
do we fearlessly read them [the Scriptures], but, as you see, bring them for your inspection, knowing that their contents will be pleasing to all.    location 5868
Justin Martyr, First Apology, Ch.44

{Ps 110:2,3; Acts 1:8}
from the womb of morning have I begotten Thee." That which he says, "He shall send to Thee the rod of power out of Jerusalem," is predictive of the mighty, word, which His apostles, going forth from Jerusalem, preached everywhere; and though death is decreed against those who teach or at all confess the name of Christ, we everywhere both embrace and teach it.    location 5876
Justin Martyr, First Apology, Ch.45

{Mt 10:28; 2 Thess 1:8-9}
And if you also read these words in a hostile spirit, ye can do no more, as I said before, than kill us; which indeed does no harm to us, but to you and all who unjustly hate us, and do not repent, brings eternal punishment by fire.    location 5878
Justin Martyr, First Apology, Ch.45

{Col 1:15; Rom 1:19-20}
We have been taught that Christ is the first-born of God, and we have declared above that He is the Word of whom every race of men were partakers; and those who lived reasonably are Christians, even though they have been thought atheists; as, among the Greeks, Socrates and Heraclitus, and men like them; and among the barbarians, Abraham, and Ananias, and Azarias, and Misael, and Elias, and many others whose actions and names we now decline to recount, because we know it would be tedious.    location 5884
Justin Martyr, First Apology, Ch.46

{Rom 2:12-15}
So that even they who lived before Christ, and lived without reason, were wicked and hostile to Christ, and slew those who lived reasonably.    location 5887
Justin Martyr, First Apology, Ch.46

{Lk 21:24}
[*referring to the cruel decree of Hadrian, which the philosophic Antonines did not annul.](ref.)
and that death is decreed against a Jew apprehended entering it, you know very well.    location 5898
Justin Martyr, First Apology, Ch.47

{Mt 27:2; Lk 3:1; Lk 13:1}
And that He did those things, you can learn from the Acts of Pontius Pilate.   location 5903
Justin Martyr, First Apology, Ch.48

{Jn 1:11; Isa 65:1}
And again, how it was said by the same Isaiah, that the Gentile nations who were not looking for Him should worship Him, but the Jews who always expected Him should not recognise Him when He came.    location 5907
Justin Martyr, First Apology, Ch.49

{Isa 65:1-2}
"I was manifest to them that asked not for Me; I was found of them that sought Me not: I said, Behold Me, to a nation that called not on My name. I spread out My hands to a disobedient and gainsaying people, to those who walked in a way that is not good, but follow after their own sins;    location 5909
Justin Martyr, First Apology, Ch.49

{Jn 1:14; Jn 1:18; Relationship of the Father and Son}
and dedicated themselves to the Unbegotten God through Christ.    location 5914
Justin Martyr, First Apology, Ch.49

{Jn 20:21-22; Jn 17:18; Acts 1:8}
and had believed, and had received power sent thence by Him upon them, and went to every race of men, they taught these things, and were called apostles.    location 5932
Justin Martyr, First Apology, Ch.50

{Dan 7:13}
hear what was spoken in reference to this by the prophet Jeremiah. His words are: "Behold, as the Son of man He cometh in the clouds of heaven, and His angels with Him."    location 5943
Justin Martyr, First Apology, Ch.51

{Lk 24:44}
Since, then, we prove that all things which have already happened had been predicted by the prophets before they came to pass, we must necessarily believe also that those things which are in like manner predicted, but are yet to come to pass, shall certainly happen.    location 5946
Justin Martyr, First Apology, Ch.52

{Isa 66:24}
punishment the wicked are to be, hear from what was said in like manner with reference to this; it is as follows: "Their worm shall not rest, and their fire shall not be quenched;" and then shall they repent, when it profits them not.    location 5954
Justin Martyr, First Apology, Ch.52

{Rev 1:7; Zech 12:3-14; Isa 63:17; Isa 64:11}
Tribe by tribe they shall mourn, and then they shall look on Him whom they have pierced; and they shall say, Why, O Lord, hast Thou made us to err from Thy way? The glory which our fathers blessed, has for us been turned into shame."    location 5959
Justin Martyr, First Apology, Ch.52

{Mt 25:31-46; Acts 17:31; Jn 5:22}
For with what reason should we believe of a crucified man that He is the first-born of the unbegotten God, and Himself will pass judgment on the whole human race, unless we had found testimonies concerning Him published before He came and was born as man,    location 5964
Justin Martyr, First Apology, Ch.53

{1 Thess 1:7-10; Col 1:6}
yea, seeing ourselves too, and knowing that the Christians from among the Gentiles are both more numerous and more true than those from among the Jews and Samaritans?    location 5968
Justin Martyr, First Apology, Ch.53

{Gen 49:28; Jer 5:20}
For all the other human races are called Gentiles by the Spirit of prophecy; but the Jewish and Samaritan races are called the tribe of Israel, and the house of Jacob.    location 5969
Justin Martyr, First Apology, Ch.53

{Isa 54:1}
because many more are the children of the desolate than of her that hath an husband." For all the Gentiles were "desolate" of the true God, serving the works of their hands;    location 5972
Justin Martyr, First Apology, Ch.53

{Gen 18:23-29; 2 Pet 2:7}
which God burned with fire and brimstone, and overthrew, no one of their inhabitants being saved except a certain stranger, a Chaldaean by birth, whose name was Lot; with whom    location 5976
Justin Martyr, First Apology, Ch.53

{Shape of the Cross}
all the things in the world, whether without this form they could be administered or have any community. For the sea is not traversed except that trophy which is called a sail abide safe in the ship; and the earth is not ploughed without it: diggers and mechanics do not their work, except with tools which have this shape.   location 6005
Justin Martyr, First Apology, Ch.55

{Shape of the Cross}
And the power of this form [the cross] is shown by your own symbols on what are called "vexilla" [banners] and trophies, with which all your state possessions are made, using these as the insignia of your power and government, even though you do so unwittingly.    location 6010
Justin Martyr, First Apology, Ch.55

{Acts 8:9-24}
For even among yourselves, as we said before, Simon was in the royal city Rome in the reign of Claudius Caesar, and so greatly astonished the sacred senate and people of the Romans, that he was considered a god, and honoured, like the others whom you honour as gods, with a statue.    location 6019
Justin Martyr, First Apology, Ch.56

{1 Pet 3:9; 1 Pet 2:21-23}
should kill and hate us; whom we not only do not hate, but, as is proved, pity and endeavour to lead to repentance.    location 6026
Justin Martyr, First Apology, Ch.57

{Rev 21:8; Rev 22:15}
But if they believe that there is nothing after death, but declare that those who die pass into insensibility, then they become our benefactors when they set us free from sufferings and necessities of this life, and prove themselves to be wicked, and inhuman, and bigoted.    location 6029
Justin Martyr, First Apology, Ch.57

{1 Jn 2:18; 1 Jn 2:22-26; 1 Jn 4:1-3; 2 Jn 7}
And, as we said before, the devils put forward Marcion of Pontus, who is even now teaching men to deny that God is the maker of all things in heaven and on earth, and that the Christ predicted by the prophets is His Son, and preaches another god besides the Creator of all,    location 6033
Justin Martyr, First Apology, Ch.58

{Plato; Heb 11:3}
So that both Plato and they who agree with him, and we ourselves, have learned, and you also can be convinced, that by the word of God the whole world was made out of the substance spoken of before by Moses. And that which the poets call Erebus, we know was spoken of formerly by Moses.    location 6046
Justin Martyr, First Apology, Ch.59

Chapter LX Plato's doctrine of the cross    location 6049
{Plato; Shape of the Cross}
*He impressed him as a  in the form of the letter ? upon the universe. Plato is speaking of the soul of the universe. [Timæus, Opp., vol. ix. p. 314].(ref)
Timaeus of Plato, where he says, "He placed him crosswise in the universe,"   location 6050
Justin Martyr, First Apology, Ch.60

{Plato; Gen 1:1}
he said that the power next to the first God was placed crosswise in the universe. And as to his speaking of a third, he did this because he read, as we said above, that which was spoken by Moses, "that the Spirit of God moved over the waters."    location 6056
Justin Martyr, First Apology, Ch.60

{Plato; Jn 1:1-2}
For he gives the second place to the Logos which is with God, who he said was placed crosswise in the universe; and the third place to the Spirit who was said to be borne upon the water, saying, "And the third around the third.)."   location 6058
Justin Martyr, First Apology, Ch.60

{Rom 6:4; Rom 6:13}
I will also relate the manner in which we dedicated ourselves to God when we had been made new through Christ; lest, if we omit this, we seem to be unfair in the explanation we are making.    location 6065
Justin Martyr, First Apology, Ch.61

{Mt 28:19; Mt 6:16-18; Eph 5:26; Jn 3:3}
As many as are persuaded and believe that what we teach and say is true, and undertake to be able to live accordingly, are instructed to pray and to entreat God with fasting, for the remission of their sins that are past, we praying and fasting with them. Then they are brought by us where there is water, and are regenerated in the same manner in which we were ourselves regenerated. For, in the name of God, the Father and Lord of the universe, and of our Saviour Jesus Christ, and of the Holy Spirit, they then receive the washing with water. ...also said, "Except ye be born again, ye shall not enter into the kingdom of heaven."    location 6066, 6070
Justin Martyr, First Apology, Ch.61

{Isa 1:16}
And how those who have sinned and repent shall escape their sins, is declared by Esaias the prophet, as I wrote above; he thus speaks: "Wash you, make you clean; put away the evil of your doings from your souls;    location 6072
Justin Martyr, First Apology, Ch.61

[Acts 2:38; Rom 6:4; Col 2:12}
And for this [rite] we have learned from the apostles this reason. Since at our birth we were born without our own knowledge or choice, by our parents coming together, and were brought up in bad habits and wicked training; in order that we may not remain the children of necessity and of ignorance, but may become the children of choice and knowledge, and may obtain in the water the remission of sins formerly committed, there is pronounced over him who chooses to be born again, and has repented of his sins, the name of God the Father and Lord of the universe; he who leads to the laver the person that is to be washed calling him by this name alone.    location 6076
Justin Martyr, First Apology, Ch.61

{Ex 20:7}
For no one can utter the name of the ineffable God; and if any one dare to say that there is a name, he raves with a hopeless madness.    location 6080
Justin Martyr, First Apology, Ch.61

{Heb 10:32}
And this washing is called illumination, because they who learn these things are illuminated in their understandings.    location 6081
Justin Martyr, First Apology, Ch.61

{Isa 1:3}
And all the Jews even now teach that the nameless God spoke to Moses; whence the Spirit of prophecy, accusing them by Isaiah the prophet mentioned above, said "The ox knoweth his owner, and the ass his master's crib;"    location 6095
Justin Martyr, First Apology, Ch.63

{Ex 3:2-6; Ex 3:14}
the senseless Jews to inflict upon Him; who, though they have it expressly affirmed in the writings of Moses, "And the angel of God spake to Moses in a flame of fire in a bush, and said, I am that I am, the God of Abraham, and the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob," yet maintain that He who said this was the Father and Creator of the universe.    location 6106
Justin Martyr, First Apology, Ch.63

{1 Jn 1:1; 1 Jn 2:23}
For they who affirm that the Son is the Father, are proved neither to have become acquainted with the Father, nor to know that the Father of the universe has a Son; who also, being the first-begotten Word of God, is even God.    location 6112
Justin Martyr, First Apology, Ch.63

{Rom 6:4-13; 1 Tim 2:8}
prayers in common for ourselves and for the baptized [illuminated] person, and for all others in every place, that we may be counted worthy, now that we have learned the truth, by our works also to be found good citizens and keepers of the commandments, so that we may be saved with an everlasting salvation.    location 6131
Justin Martyr, First Apology, Ch.65

{1 Cor 16:20; Rom 16:16; 1 Cor 11:23-26}
Having ended the prayers, we salute one another with a kiss. There is then brought to the president of the brethren bread and a cup of wine mixed with water; and he taking them, gives praise and glory to the Father of the universe, through the name of the Son and of the Holy Ghost, and offers thanks at considerable length for our being counted worthy to receive these things at His hands.    location 6133
Justin Martyr, First Apology, Ch.65

{1 Cor. 10:16,17;1 Cor 11:23-26}
And when he has concluded the prayers and thanksgivings, all the people present express their assent by saying Amen. This word Amen answers in the Hebrew language to genoito [so be it]. And when the president has given thanks, and all the people have expressed their assent, those who are called by us deacons give to each of those present to partake of the bread and wine mixed with water over which the thanksgiving was pronounced, and to those who are absent they carry away a portion.    location 6136
Justin Martyr, First Apology, Ch.65

{Titus 3:5; Acts 2:38; 1 Cor. 10:16,17}
And this food is called among us Eucharistia [the Eucharist], of which no one is allowed to partake but the man who believes that the things which we teach are true, and who has been washed with the washing that is for the remission of sins, and unto regeneration, and who is so living as Christ has enjoined.    location 6140
Justin Martyr, First Apology, Ch.66

{Lk 22:17-20; Jn 6:51-58; Jn 1:14; 1 Cor. 10:16-17}
For not as common bread and common drink do we receive these; but in like manner as Jesus Christ our Saviour, having been made flesh by the Word of God, had both flesh and blood for our salvation, so likewise have we been taught that the food which is blessed by the prayer of His word, and from which our blood and flesh by transmutation are nourished, is the flesh and blood of that Jesus who was made flesh.    location 6142
Justin Martyr, First Apology, Ch.66

{Pagan Religion}
Which [Eucharist] the wicked devils have imitated in the mysteries of Mithras,    location 6148
Justin Martyr, First Apology, Ch.66

{1 Jn 3:16-18; Acts 2:42-47}
And we afterwards continually remind each other of these things. And the wealthy among us help the needy; and we always keep together;    location 6151
Justin Martyr, First Apology, Ch.67

{2 Thess 2:15; Acts 20:7; 1 Cor 16:2; Acts 2:42-47}
And on the day called Sunday, all who live in cities or in the country gather together to one place, and the memoirs of the apostles or the writings of the prophets are read, as long as time permits; then, when the reader has ceased, the president verbally instructs, and exhorts to the imitation of these good things. Then we all rise together and pray, and, as we before said, when our prayer is ended, bread and wine and water are brought, and the president in like manner offers prayers and thanksgivings, according to his ability, and the people assent, saying Amen; and there is a distribution to each, and a participation of that over which thanks have been given, and to those who are absent a portion is sent by the deacons.    location 6153
Justin Martyr, First Apology, Ch.67

{1 Cor 16:2; Jas 1:27; Heb 13:3}
And they who are well to do, and willing, give what each thinks fit; and what is collected is deposited with the president, who succours the orphans and widows and those who, through sickness or any other cause, are in want, and those who are in bonds and the strangers sojourning among us, and in a word takes care of all who are in need.    location 6158
Justin Martyr, First Apology, Ch.67

{Gen 1:3-5; Acts 20:7; 1 Cor 16:2}
But Sunday is the day on which we all hold our common assembly, because it is the first day on which God, having wrought a change in the darkness and matter,   location 6160
Justin Martyr, First Apology, Ch.67

{Mt 28:1; Lk 24:1; Acts 20:7; 1 Cor 16:2}
and Jesus Christ our Saviour on the same day rose from the dead. For He was crucified on the day before that of Saturn (Saturday); and on the day after that of Saturn, which is the day of the Sun, having appeared to His apostles    location 6161
Justin Martyr, First Apology, Ch.67

{2 Cor 5:10; 2 Cor 5:18-20}
For we forewarn you, that you shall not escape the coming judgment of God, if you continue in your injustice; and we ourselves will invite you to do that which is pleasing to God.    location 6166
Justin Martyr, First Apology, Ch.68

{1 Pet 2:12; 1 Pet 2:17; Persecution}
And though from the letter of the greatest and most illustrious Emperor Adrian, your father, we could demand that you order judgment to be given as we have desired, yet we have made this appeal and explanation, not on the ground of Adrian's decision, but because we know that what we ask is just.    location 6167
Justin Martyr, First Apology, Ch.68

{Persecution}
   	Epistle of Adrian in behalf of the Christians:   
If the inhabitants of your province will so far sustain this petition of theirs as to accuse the Christians in some court of law, I do not prohibit them from doing so. ..  
But I will not suffer them to make use of mere entreaties and outcries. For it is far more just, if any one desires to make an accusation, that you give judgment upon it. If, therefore, any one makes the accusation, and furnishes proof that the said men do anything contrary to the laws, you shall adjudge punishments in proportion to the offences.    location 6174, 6175
Justin Martyr, Epistle of Adrian, Ch.68

{Persecution}
Epistle of Antoninus to the common assembly of Asia    location 6179
The Emperor Caesar Titus Aelius Adrianus Antoninus Augustus Pius, Supreme Pontiff,    location 6180

{Ps 115:5; Ps 135:15-18}
should have thought that the gods themselves would see to it that such offenders should not escape. For if they had the power, they themselves would much rather punish those who refuse to worship them;    location 6181
Justin Martyr, Epistle of Antoninus

{Persecution; Rom 13:1-4; Mt 5:16; Phil 2:15-16}
and you neglect the temples, and make no recognition of the worship of God. And hence you are jealous of those who do serve Him, and persecute them to the death. Concerning such persons, some others also of the governors of provinces wrote to my most divine father; to whom he replied that they should not at all disturb such persons, unless they were found to be attempting anything against the Roman government.    location 6188

{Persecution; Mt 5:13-14; Rom 8:37; Jn 16:33; 1 Cor 15:57}
Epistle of Marcus Aurelius to the senate, in which he testifies that the Christians were the cause of his victory    location 6194
Justin Martyr, Epistle of Marcus Aurelius

{Rom 2:7; Mt 25:31-40}
I. and whosoever obtains this and distinguishes himself in good works shall gain the prize of everlasting life.    location 39983
Clement of Alexandria, Who Is the Rich Man That Shall Be Saved? ch. 1

{Mt 25:41-46}
II. But others rightly and adequately comprehend this, but attaching slight importance to the works which tend to salvation, do not make the requisite preparation for attaining to the objects of their hope.    location 39990
Clement of Alexandria, Who Is the Rich Man That Shall Be Saved? ch.1

{Mt 25:31-40}
the inheritance of the kingdom of heaven is not quite cut off from them if they obey the commandments;    location 39995
Clement of Alexandria, Who Is the Rich Man That Shall Be Saved? ch.3

{2 Pet 1:5-6; 1 Cor 15:52; 2 Tim 3:7-8; 1 Cor 9:24-27; Heb 12:1}
nor let him, on the other hand, expect to grasp the crowns of immortality without struggle and effort, continuing untrained, and without contest. But let him go and put himself under the Word as his trainer, and Christ the President of the contest; and for his prescribed food and drink let him have the new testament [i.e.,the new covenant] of the Lord; and for exercises, the commandments; and for elegance and ornament, the fair dispositions, love, faith, hope, knowledge of the truth, gentleness, meekness, pity, gravity: so that, when by the last trumpet the signal shall be given for the race and departure hence, as from the stadium of life, he may with a good conscience present himself victorious before the Judge who confers the rewards, confessedly worthy of the Fatherland on high, to which he returns with crowns and the acclamations of angels.    location 40003
Clement of Alexandria, Who Is the Rich Man That Shall Be Saved? ch.3

{Mt 19:23}
IV. But Jesus answereth again, and saith unto them, Children, how hard is it for them that trust in riches to enter into the kingdom of God!    location 40020
Clement of Alexandria, Who Is the Rich Man That Shall Be Saved? ch.4

{Mt. 19:16; Mk 10:17-31}
V. These things are written in the Gospel according to Mark; and in all the rest correspondingly; although perchance the expressions vary slightly in each, yet all show identical agreement in meaning.    location 40026
Clement of Alexandria, Who Is the Rich Man That Shall Be Saved? ch.5

{Mt 19:16,17; Mk 10:18}
VI. And having been called "good," and taking the starting note from this first expression, He commences His teaching with this, turning the pupil to God, the good, and first and only dispenser of eternal life, which the Son, who received it of Him, gives to us.    location 40041
Clement of Alexandria, Who Is the Rich Man That Shall Be Saved? ch.6

{Mt 19:17; Mt 11:27; Jn 1:17}
VIII. He then who would live the true life is enjoined first to know Him "whom no one knows, except the Son reveal (Him)." Next is to be learned the greatness of the Savior after Him, and the newness of grace; for, according to the apostle, "the Law was given by Moses, grace and truth came by Jesus Christ;" and the gifts granted through a faithful servant are not equal to those bestowed by the true Son. If then the Law of Moses had been sufficient to confer eternal life, it were to no purpose for the Savior Himself to come and suffer for us,    location 40048
Clement of Alexandria, Who Is the Rich Man That Shall Be Saved? ch.8

{Mt 19:21; Mt 16:24-26}
Jesus, accordingly, does not charge him with not having fulfilled all things out of the Law, but loves him, and fondly welcomes his obedience in what he had learned; but says that he is not perfect as respects eternal life, inasmuch as he had not fulfilled what is perfect, and that he is a doer indeed of the Law, but idle at the true life.    location 40060
Clement of Alexandria, Who Is the Rich Man That Shall Be Saved? ch.9

{Rom 7:12; Gal 3:24; Rom 10:4}
For "the commandment is holy," as far as a sort of training with fear and preparatory discipline goes, leading as it did to the culmination of legislation and to grace. But Christ is the fulfilment "of the Law for righteousness to every one that believeth;" and not as a slave making slaves, but sons, and brethren, and fellow-heirs, who perform the Father's will.    location 40063
Clement of Alexandria, Who Is the Rich Man That Shall Be Saved? ch.9

{Mt 7:7; Mt 19:21; Phil 2:12; Prov 2:3-5}
"If you would be perfect." ...And divinely the expression "if you would" showed the self-determination of the soul holding converse with Him. For choice depended on the man as being free; but the gift on God as the Lord. And He gives to those who are willing and are exceedingly earnest, and ask, that so their salvation may become their own. For God compels not (for compulsion is repugnant to God), but supplies to those who seek, and bestows on those who ask, and opens to those who knock.    location 40066
Clement of Alexandria, Who Is the Rich Man That Shall Be Saved? ch.10

{Mt 19:20; Gal 3:21-22}
One thing is lacking thee,-the one thing which abides, the good, that which is now above the Law, which the Law gives not, which the Law contains not, which is the prerogative of those who live.    location 40070
Clement of Alexandria, Who Is the Rich Man That Shall Be Saved? ch.10

{Mt 6:25; Mt 19:21; Mt 13:22; Lk 10:41-42}
So also He bade him leave his busy life, and cleave to One and adhere to the grace of Him who offered everlasting life.    location 40078
Clement of Alexandria, Who Is the Rich Man That Shall Be Saved? ch.10

{Mt 19:21; Mt 6:24; Mt 13:7, 22; Mt 6:19-21}
XI. "Sell your possessions." And what is this? He does not, as some conceive off-hand, bid him to throw away the substance he possessed and abandon his property; but bids him banish from his soul his notions about wealth, his excitement and morbid feeling about it, the anxieties, which are the thorns of existence, which choke the seed of life.   location 40082
Clement of Alexandria, Who Is the Rich Man That Shall Be Saved? ch.11

{Titus 3:3-5; Mt 19:21; 2 Cor 5:17}
It is not the outward act which others have done, but something else indicated by it, greater, more godlike, more perfect, the stripping off of the passions from the soul itself and from the disposition, and the cutting up by the roots and casting out of what is alien to the mind.    location 40091
Clement of Alexandria, Who Is the Rich Man That Shall Be Saved? ch.12

{Mt 19:21; Prov 14:20; Prov 19:4,7; Mt 25:31-46}
How could one give food to the hungry, and drink to the thirsty, clothe the naked, and shelter the houseless, for not doing which He threatens with fire and the outer darkness, if each man first divested himself of all these things?    location 40105
Clement of Alexandria, Who Is the Rich Man That Shall Be Saved? ch.12

{Mt 19:21; 1 Jn 2:15-17; Heb 13:5; Jas 4:4}
The renunciation, then, and selling of all possessions, is to be understood as spoken of the passions of the soul.    location 40121
Clement of Alexandria, Who Is the Rich Man That Shall Be Saved? ch.12

{Mt 19:21; Lk 8:3}
We must therefore renounce those possessions that are injurious, not those that are capable of being serviceable, if one knows the right use of them.    location 40128
Clement of Alexandria, Who Is the Rich Man That Shall Be Saved? ch.12

{Mt 19:21;Titus 3:3-5; 2 Cor 5:17}
Why then command as new, as divine, as alone life-giving, what did not save those of former days? And what peculiar thing is it that the new creature the Son of God intimates and teaches? It is not the outward act which others have done, but something else indicated by it, greater, more godlike, more perfect, the stripping off of the passions from the soul itself and from the disposition, and the cutting up by the roots and casting out of what is alien to the mind.    location 39958  
Clement of Alexandria, Who Is the Rich Man That Shall Be Saved? ch.12 

{Mt 19:21; Acts 5:1-10; Col 2:18-23; Mt 6:1-4}
For those who formerly despised external things relinquished and squandered their property, but the passions of the soul, I believe, they intensified. For they indulged in arrogance, pretension, and vainglory,    location 39961
 Clement of Alexandria, Who Is the Rich Man That Shall Be Saved? ch.12  

{1 Tim 6:10; Acts 5:1-10; Mt 19:21}
with reference to the life which He promised? For although such is the case, one, after ridding himself of the burden of wealth, may none the less have still the lust and desire for money innate and living; and may have abandoned the use of it, but being at once destitute of and desiring what he spent, may doubly grieve both on account of the absence of attendance, and the presence of regret. For it is impossible and inconceivable that those in want of the necessaries of life should not be harassed in mind, and hindered from better things in the endeavor to provide them somehow, and from some source.    location 39964 
 Clement of Alexandria, Who Is the Rich Man That Shall Be Saved? ch.12 

{2 Cor 9:6-11; 2 Thess 3:8-13; Mt 19:21; Prov 11:24-25}
And how much more beneficial the opposite case, for a man, through possessing a competency, both not himself to be in straits about money, and also to give assistance to those to whom it is requisite so to do!    location 39969
 Clement of Alexandria, Who Is the Rich Man That Shall Be Saved? ch.13  

{Mt 19:21; Lk 16:9}
For if no one had anything, what room would be left among men for giving? And how can this dogma fail to be found plainly opposed to and conflicting with many other excellent teachings of the Lord? "Make to yourselves friends of the mammon of unrighteousness, that when ye fail, they may receive you into the everlasting habitations."    location 39970   
Clement of Alexandria, Who Is the Rich Man That Shall Be Saved? ch.13

{Mt 19:21; Lk 5:27-29; Lk 19:1-10; Prov 14:20; Prov 19:4,7}
How could one give food to the hungry, and drink to the thirsty, clothe the naked, and shelter the houseless, for not doing which He threatens with fire and the outer darkness, if each man first divested himself of all these things? Nay, He bids Zaccheus and Matthew, the rich tax-gathers, entertain Him hospitably. And He does not bid them part with their property, but, applying the just and removing the unjust judgment, He subjoins, "To-day salvation has come to this house, forasmuch as he also is a son of Abraham." He so praises the use of property as to enjoin, along with this addition, the giving a share of it, to give drink to the thirsty, bread to the hungry,    location 39973   
Clement of Alexandria, Who Is the Rich Man That Shall Be Saved? ch.13

{Mt 19:21; Deut 15:11; Heb 13:16}
Riches, then, which benefit also our neighbor s, are not to be thrown away.    location 39980   
Clement of Alexandria, Who Is the Rich Man That Shall Be Saved? ch.14

{Mt 19:21; Ps 112:3-9; Prov 21:20; Prov 13:8}
If you use it skillfully, it is skillful; if you are deficient in skill, it is affected by your want of skill, being itself destitute of blame. Such an instrument is wealth. Are you able to make a right use of it? It is subservient to righteousness. Does one make a wrong use of it? It is, on the other hand, a minister of wrong.    location 39983   
Clement of Alexandria, Who Is the Rich Man That Shall Be Saved? ch.14

{Mt 24:45-47; Mt 25:14-30}
And this is the mind and judgment of man, which has freedom in itself and self-determination in the treatment of what is assigned to it.    location 39987   
Clement of Alexandria, Who Is the Rich Man That Shall Be Saved? ch.14

{Mt 19:21; Lk 19:8; Lk 5:29; Lk 8:3; 1 Tim 6:10}
So let no man destroy wealth, rather than the passions of the soul, which are incompatible with the better use of wealth. So that, becoming virtuous and good, he may be able to make a good use of these riches.    location 39988   
Clement of Alexandria, Who Is the Rich Man That Shall Be Saved? ch.14

{Mt 19:21; Lk 12:15; 1 Tim 6:6-10}
it is then of no advantage to him to be poor in purse while he is rich in passions. For it is not what ought to be cast away that he has cast away, but what is indifferent;    location 39995   
Clement of Alexandria, Who Is the Rich Man That Shall Be Saved? ch.14

{Mt 19:21; Eph 5:5; Lk 12:15; 2 Pet 2:14; 2 Pet 2:3}
So then the Lord introduces the use of external things, bidding us put away not the means of subsistence, but what uses them badly. And these are the infirmities and passions of the soul. 
Clement of Alexandria, Who Is the Rich Man That Shall Be Saved? ch.14

{Mt 19:21; Mt 5:3; Phil 4:11-13}
and is superior to the possession of them, not the slave of the things he possesses; and does not carry them about in his soul, nor bind and circumscribe his life within them, but is ever laboring at some good and divine work, even should he be necessarily some time or other deprived of them, is able with cheerful mind to bear their removal equally with their abundance. This is he who is blessed by the Lord, and called poor in spirit, a meet heir of the kingdom of heaven, not one who could not live rich.    location 40005   
Clement of Alexandria, Who Is the Rich Man That Shall Be Saved? ch.16

{Mt 19:21; Phil 3:19-20; Lk 12:15-21; 1 Tim 6:6-10}
But he who carries his riches in his soul, and instead of God's Spirit bears in his heart gold or land, and is always acquiring possessions without end, and is perpetually on the outlook for more, bending downwards and fettered in the toils of the world, being earth and destined to depart to earth,-whence can he be able to desire and to mind the kingdom of heaven.    location 40009   
Clement of Alexandria, Who Is the Rich Man That Shall Be Saved? ch.17

{Mt 19:21; Mt 5:3}
In the same way spiritual poverty is blessed. Wherefore also Matthew added, "Blessed are the poor." How? "In spirit."    location 40018   
Clement of Alexandria, Who Is the Rich Man That Shall Be Saved? ch.17

{Mt 5:6}
And again, "Blessed are they that hunger and thirst after the righteousness of God." Wherefore wretched are the contrary kind of poor, who have no part in God, and still less in human property, and have not tasted of the righteousness of God.    location 40019   
Clement of Alexandria, Who Is the Rich Man That Shall Be Saved? ch.17

{Mt 19:21; Mt 5:39; Job 1:1-3; Gen 13:2; Jas 2:23}
An ugly man can be profligate, and a good-looking man temperate. Neither strength and great size of body makes alive, nor does any of the members destroy. But the soul which uses them provides the cause for each. Bear then, it is said, when struck on the face; which a man strong and in good health can obey. And again, a man who is feeble may transgress from refractoriness of temper. So also a poor and destitute man may be found intoxicated with lusts; and a man rich in worldly goods temperate, poor in indulgences, trustworthy, intelligent, pure, chastened.    location 40026   
Clement of Alexandria, Who Is the Rich Man That Shall Be Saved? ch.18

{Mt 19:21; Mt 5:3; Lk 12:21}
He then is truly and rightly rich who is rich in virtue, and is capable of making a holy and faithful use of any fortune; while he is spuriously rich who is rich according to the flesh and turns life into outward possession, which is transitory and perishing, and now belongs to one, now to another, and in the end to nobody at all.    location 40034   
Clement of Alexandria, Who Is the Rich Man That Shall Be Saved? ch.19

{Mt 19:21; Mt 5:3,8}
Again, in the same way there is a genuine poor man, and another counterfeit and falsely so called. He that is poor in spirit, and that is the right thing, and he that is poor in a worldly sense, which is a different thing. To him who is poor in worldly goods, but rich in vices, who is not poor in spirit and rich toward God, it is said, Abandon the alien possessions that are in thy soul, that, becoming pure in heart, thou mayest see God; which is another way of saying, Enter into the kingdom of heaven.    location 40037   
Clement of Alexandria, Who Is the Rich Man That Shall Be Saved? ch.19

{Mt 19:22; Job 1:1-3, 8, 20-22}
The wealthy and legally correct man, not understanding these things figuratively, nor how the same man can be both poor and rich, and have wealth and not have it, and use the world and not use it, went away sad and downcast, leaving the state of life, which he was able merely to desire but not to attain, making for himself the difficult impossible. For it was difficult for the soul not to be seduced and ruined by the luxuries and flowery enchantments that beset remarkable wealth; but it was not impossible, even surrounded with it, for one to lay hold of salvation, provided he withdrew himself from material wealth,-to that which is grasped by the mind and taught by God, and learned to use things indifferent rightly and properly, and so as to strive after eternal life.    location 40046   
Clement of Alexandria, Who Is the Rich Man That Shall Be Saved? ch.20

{Mt 19:25; Lk 18:26}
Why then do they [the apostles] say in consternation, "Who can be saved?"    location 40053   
Clement of Alexandria, Who Is the Rich Man That Shall Be Saved? ch.20

{Mt 19:25; 1 Cor 6:9-10}
they were excessively astonished, and despaired of themselves no less than that rich man who clung so terribly to the wealth which he preferred to eternal life. It was therefore a fit subject for all fear on the disciples' part; if both he that possesses wealth and he that is teeming with passions were the rich, and these alike shall be expelled from the heavens.    location 40056   
Clement of Alexandria, Who Is the Rich Man That Shall Be Saved? ch.20

{Mt 19:26}
But the Lord replies, "Because what is impossible with men is possible with God." This again is full of great wisdom. For a man by himself working and toiling at freedom from passion achieves nothing. But if he plainly shows himself very desirous and earnest about this, he attains it by the addition of the power of God. For God conspires with willing souls. But if they abandon their eagerness, the spirit which is bestowed by God is also restrained. For to save the unwilling is the part of one exercising compulsion; but to save the willing, that of one showing grace.    location 40059   
Clement of Alexandria, Who Is the Rich Man That Shall Be Saved? ch.21

{Mt 11:12}
Nor does the kingdom of heaven belong to sleepers and sluggards, "but the violent take it by force." For this alone is commendable violence, to force God, and take life from God by force. And He, knowing those who persevere firmly, or rather violently, yields and grants. For God delights in being vanquished in such things.    location 40063   
Clement of Alexandria, Who Is the Rich Man That Shall Be Saved? ch.21

{Mt 19:27; Mt 17:27}
Therefore on hearing those words, the blessed Peter, the chosen, the pre-eminent, the first of the disciples, for whom alone and Himself the Savior paid tribute, quickly seized and comprehended the saying. And what does he say? "Lo, we have left all and followed Thee."    location 40066   
Clement of Alexandria, Who Is the Rich Man That Shall Be Saved? ch.21

{Phil 3:12-14; Heb 12:1; 1 Pet 3:4}
For it is thus that one truly follows the Savior, by aiming at sinlessness and at His perfection, and adorning and composing the soul before it as a mirror, and arranging everything in all respects similarly.    location 40070   
Clement of Alexandria, Who Is the Rich Man That Shall Be Saved? ch.21

{Lk 14:26}
"Whoso hateth not father, and mother, and children, and his own life besides, cannot be My disciple." For the God of peace, who also exhorts to love enemies, does not introduce hatred and dissolution from those that are dearest. But if we are to love our enemies, it is in accordance with right reason that, ascending from them, we should love also those nearest in kindred. Or if we are to hate our blood-relations, deduction teaches us that much more are we to spurn from us our enemies. So that the reasonings would be shown to destroy one another. But they do not destroy each other, nor are they near doing so. For from the same feeling and disposition, and on the ground of the same rule, one loving his enemy may hate his father, inasmuch as he neither takes vengeance on an enemy, nor reverences a father more than Christ.    location 40074   
Clement of Alexandria, Who Is the Rich Man That Shall Be Saved? ch.22

{Mk 10:29}
If then one's father, or son, or brother, be godless, and become a hindrance to faith and an impediment to the higher life, let him not be friends or agree with him, but on account of the spiritual enmity, let him dissolve the fleshly relationship.    location 40080   
Clement of Alexandria, Who Is the Rich Man That Shall Be Saved? ch.22

{Mt 10:21, 34-39}
Suppose the matter to be a lawsuit. Let your father be imagined to present himself to you and say, "I begot and reared thee. Follow me, and join with me in wickedness, and obey not the law of Christ;"    location 40083   
Clement of Alexandria, Who Is the Rich Man That Shall Be Saved? ch.23

{Mt 19:21; Mt 5:9}
You may even go against wealth. Say, "Certainly Christ does not debar me from property. The Lord does not envy." But do you see yourself overcome and overthrown by it? Leave it, throw it away, hate, renounce, flee. "Even if thy right eye offend thee," quickly "cut it out."    location 40093   
Clement of Alexandria, Who Is the Rich Man That Shall Be Saved? ch.24

{Mk 10:30; 1 Pet 2:11}
And the expression "with persecutions" rejects the possessing of each of those things. There is a persecution which arises from without, from men assailing the faithful, either out of hatred, or envy, or avarice, or through diabolic agency. But the most painful is internal persecution, which proceeds from each man's own soul being vexed by impious lusts, and diverse pleasures, and base hopes, and destructive dreams; when, always grasping at more, and maddened by brutish loves, and inflamed by the passions which beset it like goads    location 40100   
Clement of Alexandria, Who Is the Rich Man That Shall Be Saved? ch.25

{Jas 4:1-5; Jas 1:13-16; Mt 15:18-19}
More grievous and painful is this persecution, which arises from within, which is ever with a man, and which the persecuted cannot escape; for he carries the enemy about everywhere in himself.    location 40105   
Clement of Alexandria, Who Is the Rich Man That Shall Be Saved? ch.25

{Mt. 19:21; Heb 12:2}
the Savior by no means has excluded the rich on account of wealth itself, and the possession of property, nor fenced off salvation against them; if they are able and willing to submit their life to God's commandments, and prefer them to transitory objects, and if they would look to the Lord with steady eye,    location 40115   
Clement of Alexandria, Who Is the Rich Man That Shall Be Saved? ch.26

{Mt. 19:21; Acts 10:34-35; Acts 8:27-38; Mk 15:43}
For if, in consequence of his involuntary birth in wealth, a man is banished from life, rather is he wronged by God, who created him, in having vouchsafed to him temporary enjoyment, and in being deprived of eternal life.    location 40121   
Clement of Alexandria, Who Is the Rich Man That Shall Be Saved? ch.26

{Mt. 19:21; Mt 19:24}
But if one is able in the midst of wealth to turn from its power, and to entertain moderate sentiments, and to exercise self-command, and to seek God alone, and to breathe God and walk with God, such a poor man submits to the commandments, being free, unsubdued, free of disease, unwounded by wealth. But if not, "sooner shall a camel enter through a needle's eye, than such a rich man reach the kingdom of God."    location 40123   
Clement of Alexandria, Who Is the Rich Man That Shall Be Saved? ch.26

*Strom.3.3 (13.1), 3.3(21.2) (source)
Let then the camel, going through a narrow and strait way before the rich man, signify something loftier; which mystery of the Savior is to be learned in the "Exposition of first Principles and of Theology." *   location 40126   
Clement of Alexandria, Who Is the Rich Man That Shall Be Saved? ch.26

{Mt. 19:21; Phil 2:12}
Well, first let the point of the parable, which is evident, and the reason why it is spoken, be presented. Let it teach the prosperous that they are not to neglect their own salvation, as if they had been already fore-doomed, nor, on the other hand, to cast wealth into the sea, or condemn it as a traitor and an enemy to life, but learn in what way and how to use wealth and obtain life. For since neither does one perish by any means by fearing because he is rich, nor is by any means saved by trusting and believing that he shall be saved, come let them look what hope the Savior assigns them, and how what is unexpected may become ratified, and what is hoped for may come into possession.    location 40128   
Clement of Alexandria, Who Is the Rich Man That Shall Be Saved? ch.27

{Mt 22:36-38; Rom 11:36; Acts 17:28}
The Master accordingly, when asked, "Which is the greatest of the commandments?" says, "Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy soul, and with all thy strength;" that no commandment is greater than this (He says), and with exceeding good reason; for it gives command respecting the First and the Greatest, God Himself, our Father, by whom all things were brought into being, and exist, and to whom what is saved returns again.    location 40133   
Clement of Alexandria, Who Is the Rich Man That Shall Be Saved? ch.27

{Jn 15:9; 1 Cor 8:3}
gaining immortality by the very exercise of loving the Father to the extent of one's might and power. For the more one loves God, the more he enters within God.    location 40139   
Clement of Alexandria, Who Is the Rich Man That Shall Be Saved? ch.27

{Mt 22:39}
The second in order, and not any less than this, He says, is, "Thou shalt love thy neighbor  as thyself," consequently God above thyself.    location 40140   
Clement of Alexandria, Who Is the Rich Man That Shall Be Saved? ch.28

{Lk 10:29}
And on His interlocutor inquiring, "Who is my neighbor?" He did not, in the same way with the Jews, specify the blood-relation, or the fellow-citizen, or the proselyte, or him that had been similarly circumcised, or the man who uses one and the same law.    location 40141   
Clement of Alexandria, Who Is the Rich Man That Shall Be Saved? ch.28

{Lk 10:33-35}
Who else can it [the Good Samaritan] be but the Savior Himself? or who more than He has pitied us, who by the rulers of darkness were all but put to death with many wounds, fears, lusts, passions, pains, deceits, pleasures? Of these wounds the only physician is Jesus, who cuts out the passions thoroughly by the root,-not as the law does the bare effects, the fruits of evil plants, but applies His axe to the roots of wickedness.    location 40149   
Clement of Alexandria, Who Is the Rich Man That Shall Be Saved? ch.29

{Lk 10:33-35; 1 Cor 13:13}
He it is that poured wine on our wounded souls (the blood of David's vine), that brought the oil which flows from the compassions of the Father, and bestowed it copiously. He it is that produced the ligatures of health and of salvation that cannot be undone,-Love, Faith, Hope.    location 40152   
Clement of Alexandria, Who Is the Rich Man That Shall Be Saved? ch.29

{Mt 7:21; Lk 6:46; Jn 14:21; Jn 14:23,24}
We are therefore to love Him [Jesus] equally with God. And he loves Christ Jesus who does His will and keeps His commandments. "For not everyone that saith unto Me, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the kingdom of heaven; but he that doeth the will of My Father." And "Why call ye Me Lord, Lord, and do not the things which I say?"    location 40155   
Clement of Alexandria, Who Is the Rich Man That Shall Be Saved? ch.29

{Mt 25: 34-35, 40; Mt 10:40; Lk 10:16}
For whatever is done to a disciple, the Lord accepts as done to Himself, and reckons the whole as His. "Come, ye blessed of My Father, inherit the kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of the world. For I was an hungered, and ye gave Me to eat.... "not done it unto one of the least of these, ye have not done it to Me." And in another place, "He that receiveth you; receiveth Me; and he that receiveth not you, rejecteth Me."    location 40160,  
40167
   Clement of Alexandria, Who Is the Rich Man That Shall Be Saved? ch.30

{Mt 11:11}
Similarly also He says that "the least in the kingdom of heaven" that is His own disciple "is greater than John, the greatest among those born of women."    location 40171   
Clement of Alexandria, Who Is the Rich Man That Shall Be Saved? ch.31

{Lk 16:9}
And again, "Make to you friends of the mammon of unrighteousness, that, when ye fail, they may receive you into everlasting habitations;" showing that by nature all property which a man possesses in his own power is not his own. And from this unrighteousness it is permitted to work a righteous and saving thing, to refresh some one of those who have an everlasting habitation with the Father.    location 40174   
Clement of Alexandria, Who Is the Rich Man That Shall Be Saved? ch.31

{Lk 16:9; 1 Cor 10:33; Acts 20:24; Acts 20:33-35}
See then, first, that He has not commanded you to be solicited or to wait to be importuned, but yourself to seek those who are to be benefited and are worthy disciples of the Savior.    location 40177   
Clement of Alexandria, Who Is the Rich Man That Shall Be Saved? ch.31

{2 Cor 9:7; Lk 6:30; Mt 5:42}
"For the Lord loveth a cheerful giver;" who delights in giving, and spares not, sowing so that he may also thus reap, without murmuring, and disputing, and regret, and communicating, which is pure beneficence. But better than this is the saying spoken by the Lord in another place, "Give to everyone that asketh thee." For truly such is God's delight in giving. And this saying is above all divinity,-not to wait to be asked, but to inquire oneself who deserves to receive kindness.    location 40179   
Clement of Alexandria, Who Is the Rich Man That Shall Be Saved? ch.31

{Lk 16:9}
O excellent trading! O divine merchandise! One purchases immortality for money; and, by giving the perishing things of the world, receives in exchange for these an eternal mansion in the heavens! Sail to this mart, if you are wise, O rich man!    location 40183   
Clement of Alexandria, Who Is the Rich Man That Shall Be Saved? ch.32

{Lk 16:9}
The Lord did not say, Give, or bring, or do good, or help, but make a friend. But a friend proves himself such not by one gift, but by long intimacy. For it is neither the faith, nor the love, nor the hope, nor the endurance of one day, but "he that endureth to the end shall be saved."    location 40189   
Clement of Alexandria, Who Is the Rich Man That Shall Be Saved? ch.32

{Lk 6:37-38; Lk 16:9; Mt 5:42}
Do not you judge who is worthy or who is unworthy. For it is possible you may be mistaken in your opinion. As in the uncertainty of ignorance it is better to do good to the undeserving for the sake of the deserving, than by guarding against those that are less good to fail to meet in with the good.    location 40192   
Clement of Alexandria, Who Is the Rich Man That Shall Be Saved? ch.33

{1 Tim 6:18; Lk 16:9; Mt 5:42}
But by offering to all in turn that need, you must of necessity by all means find some one of those who have power with God to save.    location 40196   
Clement of Alexandria, Who Is the Rich Man That Shall Be Saved? ch.33

{Rom 12:13; 2 Cor 8:1-5; Heb 13:16; Lk 16:9; Mt 5:42}
Open thy compassion to all who are enrolled the disciples of God; not looking contemptuously to personal appearance, nor carelessly disposed to any period of life. Nor if one appears penniless, or ragged, or ugly, or feeble, do thou fret in soul at this and turn away.    location 40198   
Clement of Alexandria, Who Is the Rich Man That Shall Be Saved? ch.33

{Lk 16:9}
But contrary to what is the case with the rest of men, collect for thyself an unarmed, an unwarlike, a bloodless, a passionless, a stainless host, pious old men, orphans dear to God, widows armed with meekness, men, adorned with love. Obtain with thy money such guards, for body and for soul, for whose sake a sinking ship is made buoyant, when steered by the prayers of the saints alone; and disease at its height is subdued, put to flight by the laying on of hands; and the attack of robbers is disarmed, spoiled by pious prayers;    location 40205   
Clement of Alexandria, Who Is the Rich Man That Shall Be Saved? ch.34

{Mt 5:13-14}
hiding in the depth of their mind the ineffable mysteries, and disdaining to let their nobleness be seen in the world; whom the Word calls "the light of the world, and the salt of the earth." This is the seed, the image and likeness of God, and His true son and heir....and all things are held together so long as the seed remains here; and when it is gathered, these things shall be very quickly dissolved.    location 40218, 40221   
Clement of Alexandria, Who Is the Rich Man That Shall Be Saved? ch.36

{Jn 1:18}
And then thou shalt look into the bosom of the Father, whom God the only-begotten Son alone hath declared.    location 40223   
Clement of Alexandria, Who Is the Rich Man That Shall Be Saved? ch.37

{1 Jn 4:8; 1 Jn 4:16; Ps 2:7; Acts 13:33; Heb 1:5; Heb 5:5}
And God Himself is love; and out of love to us became feminine. In His ineffable essence He is Father; in His compassion to us He became Mother. The Father by loving became feminine: and the great proof of this is He whom He begot of Himself; and the fruit brought forth by love is love.    location 40224   
Clement of Alexandria, Who Is the Rich Man That Shall Be Saved? ch.37

{Phil 2:6-8; Heb 2:17-18; Heb 4:15; Mk10:45; Lk 22:19-20}
For this He voluntarily subjected Himself to the experiences of men, that by bringing Himself to the measure of our weakness whom He loved, He might correspondingly bring us to the measure of His own strength. And about to be offered up and giving Himself a ransom, He left for us a new testament: My love I give unto you. And what and how great is it? For each of us He gave His life,-the    location 40227   
Clement of Alexandria, Who Is the Rich Man That Shall Be Saved? ch.37

{Acts 2:44-45; Acts 4:32-35; 1 Jn 3:16-18}
And if we owe our lives to the brethren, and have made such a mutual compact with the Savior, why should we any more hoard and shut up worldly goods, which are beggarly, foreign to us and transitory? Shall we shut up from each other what after a little shall be the property of the fire?    location 40230   
Clement of Alexandria, Who Is the Rich Man That Shall Be Saved? ch.37

{1 Jn 3:10-12, 15}
Divinely and weightily John says, "He that loveth not his brother is a murderer," the seed of Cain, a nursling of the devil. He has not God's compassion. He has no hope of better things. He is sterile; he is barren; he is not a branch of the ever-living supercelestial vine. He is cut off; he waits the perpetual fire.    location 40232   
Clement of Alexandria, Who Is the Rich Man That Shall Be Saved? ch.37

{1 Cor 13:13}
"But these three abide, Faith, Hope, Love. But the greatest of these is Love." And rightly. For Faith departs when we are convinced by sight, by seeing God. And Hope vanishes when the things hoped for come. But Love comes to completion, and grows more when that which is perfect has been bestowed. If one introduces it into his soul, although he be born in sins, and has done....many forbidden things, he is able, by increasing love, and adopting a pure repentance, to retrieve his mistakes.    location 40238, 40241   
Clement of Alexandria, Who Is the Rich Man That Shall Be Saved? ch.38

{Lk 15:10; Hos 6:6; Mt 9:13; Ezek 18:23}
If one should escape the superfluity of riches, and the difficulty they interpose in the way of life, and be able to enjoy the eternal good things; but should happen, either from ignorance or involuntary circumstances, after the seal and redemption, to fall into sins or transgressions so as to be quite carried away; such a man is entirely rejected by God. For to everyone who has turned to God in truth, and with his whole heart, the doors are open, and the thrice-glad Father receives His truly repentant son. And true repentance is to be no longer bound in the same sins for which He denounced death against Himself, but to eradicate them completely from the soul. For on their extirpation God takes up His abode again in thee. For it is said there is great and exceeding joy and festival in the heavens with the Father and the angels when one sinner turns and repents. Wherefore also He cries, "I will have mercy, and not sacrifice." "I desire not the death, but the repentance of the sinner."    location 40243   
Clement of Alexandria, Who Is the Rich Man That Shall Be Saved? ch.39

{Lk 11:13}
"And if we, being evil, know to give good gifts," much more is it the nature of the Father of mercies, the good Father of all consolation, much pitying, very merciful, to be long-suffering, to wait for those who have turned. And to turn is really to cease from our sins, and to look no longer behind.    location 40252   
Clement of Alexandria, Who Is the Rich Man That Shall Be Saved? ch.39

{Ezek 1:1-32; 2 Pet 2:20; Mt 12:43-45}
So that even in the case of one who has done the greatest good deeds in his life, but at the end has run headlong into wickedness, all his former pains are profitless to him, since at the catastrophe of the drama he has given up his part; while it is possible for the man who formerly led a bad and dissolute life, on afterwards repenting, to overcome in the time after repentance the evil conduct of a long time.    location 40257   
Clement of Alexandria, Who Is the Rich Man That Shall Be Saved? ch.40

{Eph 4:28; 2 Cor 7:1; Rom 13:11-14}
Thief, dost thou wish to get forgiveness? steal no more. Adulterer, burn no more. Fornicator, live for the future chastely. Thou who hast robbed, give back, and give back more than [thou tookest]. False witness, practice truth. Perjurer, swear no more,    location 40261  
 Clement of Alexandria, Who Is the Rich Man That Shall Be Saved? ch.40

{Mt. 5:25,26}
that thou mayest be found at the end to have previously in this world been reconciled to the Adversary.    location 40263   
Clement of Alexandria, Who Is the Rich Man That Shall Be Saved? ch.40

{2 Cor 3:18; Phil 3:12-14}
It is then probably impossible all at once to eradicate inbred passions; but by God's power and human intercession, and the help of brethren, and sincere repentance, and constant care, they are corrected.    location 40264   
Clement of Alexandria, Who Is the Rich Man That Shall Be Saved? ch.40

{1 Cor 4:14-17; Gal 4:19; 1 Tim 1:2; 2 Tim 1:3; 2 Tim 1:13; Titus 1:4}
Wherefore it is by all means necessary for thee, who art pompous, and powerful, and rich, to set over thyself some man of God as a trainer and governor. Reverence, though it be but one man; fear, though it be but one man....Let him pass many sleepless nights for thee, interceding for thee with God, influencing the Father with the magic of familiar litanies.    location 40265, 40270   
Clement of Alexandria, Who Is the Rich Man That Shall Be Saved? ch.41

{Introduction to John; Introduction to Revelation}
listen to a tale, which is not a tale but a narrative, handed down and committed to the custody of memory, about the Apostle John. For when, on the tyrant's death, he returned to Ephesus from the isle of Patmos, he went away, being invited, to the contiguous territories of the nations, here to appoint bishops, there to set in order whole Churches, there to ordain such as were marked out by the Spirit.    location 40276   
Clement of Alexandria, Who Is the Rich Man That Shall Be Saved? ch.42

{Rev 3:19; 2 Cor 7:9-11; Lk 23:40-43}
presenting in him [a repentant robber] a great example of true repentance and a great token of regeneration, a trophy of the resurrection for which we hope; when at the end of the world, the angels, radiant with joy, hymning and opening the heavens, shall receive into the celestial abodes those who truly repent; and before all, the Savior Himself goes to meet them, welcoming them; holding forth the shadowless, ceaseless light; conducting them, to the Father's bosom, to eternal life, to the kingdom of heaven.    location 40308   
Clement of Alexandria, Who Is the Rich Man That Shall Be Saved? ch.42

{Heb 11:26-31; Heb 6:4-8}
For he who in this world welcomes the angel of repentance will not repent at the time that he leaves the body, nor be ashamed when he sees the Savior approaching in His glory and with His army. He fears not the fire. But if one chooses to continue and to sin perpetually in pleasures, and values indulgence here above eternal life, and turns away from the Savior, who gives forgiveness; let him no more blame either God, or riches, or his having fallen, but his own soul, which voluntarily perishes.    location 40314   
Clement of Alexandria, Who Is the Rich Man That Shall Be Saved? ch.42

{Soul; Wis 7:22}
Since then the soul consists of three divisions; the intellect, which is called the reasoning faculty, is the inner man, which is the ruler of this [physical] man that is seen. And that one, in another respect, God guides. But the irascible part, being brutal, dwells near to insanity. And appetite, which is the third department,    location 28917
Clement of Alexandria, The Pedagogue, bk. 3, ch. 1

{Beard}
"At first he was a lion with ample beard."(Odyss., iv. 456-458) While he yet retained the ornament, the hair of the chin showed him to be a man.    location 28921
Clement of Alexandria, The Pedagogue, bk. 3, ch.1

{Ps 45:2}
But that man with whom the Word dwells does not alter himself, does not get himself up: he has the form which is of the Word; he is made like to God; he is beautiful; he does not ornament himself: his is beauty, the true beauty, for it is God; and that man becomes God, since God so wills.    location 28928 
Clement of Alexandria, The Pedagogue, bk. 3, ch.1

{1 Tim 2:5}
"Men are gods, and gods are men." For the Word Himself is the manifest mystery: God in man, and man God. And the Mediator executes the Father's will; for the Mediator is the Word, who is common to both--the Son of God, the Savior of men; His Servant, our Teacher.    location 28930
Clement of Alexandria, The Pedagogue, bk. 3, ch.1

{Phil 2:7}
And the flesh being a slave, as Paul testifies, how can one with any reason adorn the handmaid like a pimp?    location 28932
Clement of Alexandria, The Pedagogue, bk. 3, ch.1

{1 Cor 13:4; 1 Jn 2:15-16; Ps 119:37}
"Love vaunteth not itself, is not puffed up." For the decking of one's self out--carrying, as it does, the look of superfluity and uselessness--is vaunting one's self.    location 28937
Clement of Alexandria, The Pedagogue, bk. 3, ch.1

{Isa 53:2-3}
And that the Lord Himself was uncomely in aspect, the Spirit testifies by Esaias: "And we saw Him, and He had no form nor comeliness but His form was mean, inferior to men." Yet who was more admirable than the Lord? But it was not the beauty of the flesh visible to the eye, but the true beauty of both soul and body, which He exhibited, which in the former is beneficence; in the latter--that is, the flesh--immortality.    location 28941
Clement of Alexandria, The Pedagogue, bk. 3, ch.1

{1 Pet 3:4}
It is not, then, the aspect of the outward man, but the soul that is to be decorated with the ornament of goodness;    location 28946
Clement of Alexandria, The Pedagogue, bk. 3, ch.2

{1 Tim 2:9-10; 1 Pet 3:3-4}
So those women who wear gold, occupying themselves in curling at their locks, and engaged in anointing their cheeks, painting their eyes, and dyeing their hair, and practising the other pernicious arts of luxury, decking the covering of flesh,--in truth, imitate the Egyptians, in order to attract their infatuated lovers.    location 28956
Clement of Alexandria, The Pedagogue, bk. 3, ch.2

{Gen 1:27; 1 Pet 3:4}
But if one withdraw the veil of the temple, I mean the head-dress, the dye, the clothes, the gold, the paint, the cosmetics,--that is, the web consisting of them, the veil, with the view of finding within the true beauty, he will be disgusted, I know well. For he will not find the image of God dwelling within, as is meet; but instead of it a fornicator and adulteress has occupied the shrine of the soul.    location 28958
Clement of Alexandria, The Pedagogue, bk. 3, ch.2

{1 Pet 4:3; Eph 4:17-19}
For love of display is not for a lady, but a courtesan. Such women care little for keeping at home with their husbands; but loosing their husbands' purse-strings, they spend its supplies on their lusts, that they may have many witnesses of their seemingly fair appearance; and, devoting the whole day to their toilet, they spend their time with their bought slaves.   location 28963
Clement of Alexandria, The Pedagogue, bk. 3, ch.2

{Prov 16:31}
The woman who dyes her hair yellow, Menander the comic poet expels from the house:-- "Now get out of this house, for no chaste Woman ought to make her hair yellow,"   location 28968
Clement of Alexandria, The Pedagogue, bk. 3, ch.2

{1 Tim 5:11-15; Titus 2:3-5}
As you might expect, they become lazy in housekeeping, sitting like painted things to be looked at, not as if made for domestic economy.    location 28975
Clement of Alexandria, The Pedagogue, bk. 3, ch.2

{Jn 17:17}
["Thy word is truth," is here in mind; and, soon after, he speaks of the Scriptures and the Word (Logos) in the same way.](source)
These, then, who are disgusting even to the heathen poets for their fashions, how shall they not be rejected by the truth?    location 28987
Clement of Alexandria, The Pedagogue, bk. 3, ch.2

{1 Tim 6:9-10; 2 Tim 3:2; Lk 16:14}
Love of dainties and love of wine, though great vices, are not of such magnitude as fondness for finery. "A full table and repeated cups" are enough to satisfy greed. But to those who are fond of gold, and purple, and jewels, neither the gold that is above the earth and below it is sufficient,    location 29016
Clement of Alexandria, The Pedagogue, bk. 3, ch.2

{1 Tim 2:9-10; 1 Pet 3:3-4}
For those that glory in their looks, not in heart, dress to please others. For as the brand shows the slave, so do gaudy colors the adulteress.    location 29022
Clement of Alexandria, The Pedagogue, bk. 3, ch.2

{Jer 4:30}
"For though thou clothe thyself in scarlet, and deck thyself with ornaments of gold, and anoint thine eyes with stibium, in vain is thy beauty," says the Word by Jeremiah. Is it not monstrous, that while horses, birds, and the rest of the animals, spring and bound from the grass and meadows, rejoicing in ornament that is their own, in mane, and natural color, and varied plumage; woman, as if inferior to the brute creation, should think herself so unlovely as to need foreign, and bought, and painted beauty?    location 29023
Clement of Alexandria, The Pedagogue, bk. 3, ch.2

{1 Sam 16:7; 2 Cor 5:7}
Likewise also, when Samuel the prophet was sent to anoint one of the sons of Jesse for king, and on seeing the eldest of his sons to be fair and tall, produced the anointing oil, being delighted with him, the Lord said to him, "Look not to his appearance, nor the height of his stature: for I have rejected him. For man looketh on the eyes, but the Lord into the heart." And he anointed not him that was comely in person, but him that was comely in soul. If, then, the Lord counts the natural beauty of the body inferior to that of the soul, what thinks He of spurious beauty, rejecting utterly as He does all falsehood? "For we walk by faith, not by sight."    location 29036
Clement of Alexandria, The Pedagogue, bk. 3, ch.2

{Gen 12:1; Heb 11:8-10; Jas 2:23}
Very clearly the Lord accordingly teaches by Abraham, that he who follows God must despise country, and relations, and possessions, and all wealth, by making him a stranger. And therefore also He called him His friend who had despised the substance which he had possessed at home.    location 29041
Clement of Alexandria, The Pedagogue, bk. 3, ch.2

{Esth 2:9, 15}
Esther alone we find justly adorned. The spouse adorned herself mystically for her royal husband; but her beauty turns out the redemption price of a people that were about to be massacred.    location 29044
Clement of Alexandria, The Pedagogue, bk. 3, ch.2

{Gen 6:1-2}
An example of this are the angels, who renounced the beauty of God for a beauty which fades, and so fell from heaven to earth.    location 29068
Clement of Alexandria, The Pedagogue, bk. 3, ch.2

{Lk 16:19; Lk 7:25; Rev 18:10-13}
but men also are infected with the disease. For not being free of the love of finery, they are not in health; but inclining to voluptuousness, they become effeminate, cutting their hair in an unmanly and tawdry way, clothed in fine and transparent garments, chewing mastic, smelling of perfume. What can one say on seeing them?    location 29072
Clement of Alexandria, The Pedagogue, bk. 3, ch.3

{Rom 1:26-32; Eph 4:18-19}
For the service [of such men], the towns are full of those who take out hair by pitch-plasters, shave, and pluck out hairs from these womanish creatures. And shops are erected and opened everywhere; and adepts at this tawdry fornication make a deal of money openly by those who plaster themselves, and give their hair to be pulled out in all ways by those who make it their trade,    location 29077
Clement of Alexandria, The Pedagogue, bk. 3, ch.3

{2 Sam 10:4-5}
But for those who are men to shave and smooth themselves, how ignoble! As for dyeing of hair, and anointing of grey locks, and dyeing them yellow, these are practices of abandoned effeminates; and their feminine combing of themselves is a thing to be let alone.   location 29083
Clement of Alexandria, The Pedagogue, bk. 3, ch.3

{Dan 7:9; Mt 5:36; Sir 25:6}
But though they do doctor the hair cleverly, they will not escape wrinkles, nor will they elude death by tricking time. For it is not dreadful, it is not dreadful to appear old....
Prophecy has called him the "Ancient of days; and the hair of His head was as pure wool," says the prophet. "And none other," says the Lord, "can make the hair white or black." How, then, do these godless ones work in rivalry with God, or rather violently oppose Him, when they transmute the hair made white by Him? "The crown of old men is great experience," says Scripture; and the hoary hair of their countenance is the blossom of large experience.    location 29086, 29089
Clement of Alexandria, The Pedagogue, bk. 3, ch.3

{1 Cor 11:14}
But for one who is a man to comb himself and shave himself with a razor, for the sake of fine effect, to arrange his hair at the looking-glass, to shave his cheeks, pluck hairs out of them, and smooth them, how womanly!    location 29097
Clement of Alexandria, The Pedagogue, bk. 3, ch.3

{Beard; Ps 133:2; Ezra 9:3;1 Chr 19:4-5; Isa 7:20; Isa 50:6}
But [God] has adorned man, like the lions, with a beard, and endowed him, as an attribute of manhood, with shaggy breasts,--a sign this of strength and rule. So also cocks, which fight in defense of the hens, he has decked with combs, as it were helmets; and so high a value does God set on these locks, that He orders them to make their appearance on men simultaneously with discretion,    location 29102
Clement of Alexandria, The Pedagogue, bk. 3, ch.3

{Beard; 1 Cor 11:3, 7}
This, then, the mark of the man, the beard, by which he is seen to be a man, is older than Eve, and is the token of the superior nature. In this God deemed it right that he should excel, and dispersed hair over man's whole body.    location 29107
Clement of Alexandria, The Pedagogue, bk. 3, ch.3

{Ps 133:2; Ezra 9:3;1 Chr 19:4-5; Isa 7:20; Isa 50:6; Ezek 5:1; 1 Sam 21:13; 2 Sam 20:9}
It is therefore impious to desecrate the symbol of manhood, hairiness.    location 29112
Clement of Alexandria, The Pedagogue, bk. 3, ch.3

{Rev 18:13}
I pity the boys possessed by the slave-dealers, that are decked for dishonour. But they are not treated with ignominy by themselves, but by command the wretches are adorned for base gain.    location 29130
Clement of Alexandria, The Pedagogue, bk. 3, ch.3

{Rom 1:26-28; 1 Cor 6:15-16; 1 Cor 6:9-10}
Beside them women stand in the stews, offering their own flesh for hire for lewd pleasure, and boys, taught to deny their sex, act the part of women.    location 29134
Clement of Alexandria, The Pedagogue, bk. 3, ch.3

{Rom 1:26-28}
Men play the part of women, and women that of men, contrary to nature; women are at once wives and husbands:    location 29136
Clement of Alexandria, The Pedagogue, bk. 3, ch.3

{Exposing of Children}
For fathers, unmindful of children of theirs that have been exposed, often without their knowledge, have intercourse with a son that has debauched himself, and daughters that are prostitutes;    location 29139
Clement of Alexandria, The Pedagogue, bk. 3, ch.3

{Beard; Roman Culture; Ps 133:2}
I admire the ancient legislators of the Romans: these detested effeminacy of conduct; and the giving of the body to feminine purposes, contrary to the law of nature, they judged worthy of the extremest penalty, according to the righteousness of the Law. For it is not lawful to pluck out the beard, man's natural and noble ornament.    location 29147
Clement of Alexandria, The Pedagogue, bk. 3, ch.3

{Beard}
Lions glory in their shaggy hair, but are armed by their hair in the fight; and boars even are made imposing by their mane; the hunters are afraid of them when they see them bristling their hair.    location 29160
Clement of Alexandria, The Pedagogue, bk. 3, ch.3

{Scythians}
Of the nations, the Celts and Scythians wear their hair long, but do not deck themselves. The bushy hair of the barbarian has something fearful in it; and its auburn (xanthon) color threatens war, the hue being somewhat akin to blood. Both these barbarian races hate luxury.    location 29163
Clement of Alexandria, The Pedagogue, bk. 3, ch.3

{Acts 15:20, 29; Heb 2:14-16}
Perish, then, the savage beasts whose food is blood! For it is unlawful for men, whose body is nothing but flesh elaborated of blood, to touch blood. For human blood has become a partaker of the Word: it is a participant of grace by the Spirit; and if any one injure him, he will not escape unnoticed.    location 29173
Clement of Alexandria, The Pedagogue, bk. 3, ch.3

{1 Tim 6:6-8; Prov 30:8; Mt 6:25-33; Mt 13:22}
But I approve the simplicity of the barbarians: loving an unencumbered life, the barbarians have abandoned luxury. Such the Lord calls us to be--naked of finery, naked of vanity, wrenched from our sins, bearing only the wood of life, aiming only at salvation.   location 29175
Clement of Alexandria, The Pedagogue, bk. 3, ch.3

{Mt 19:12}
*In Matthew 19:12, ,He says, "There are eunuchs who were born that way, and there are eunuchs who have been made eunuchs by others--and there are those who choose to live like eunuchs for the sake of the kingdom of heaven. The one who can accept this should accept it." Jesus identifies three types of "eunuchs" here: natural eunuchs ("born that way"), forced eunuchs ("made eunuchs by others"), and voluntary eunuchs ("those who choose").(source)
a true eunuch is not one who is unable, but one who is unwilling, to indulge in pleasure.   location 29187
Clement of Alexandria, The Pedagogue, bk. 3, ch.4

{Jas 5:1-5}
it is out of luxuriousness that they [the rich] are carried on their domestics' shoulders, and desire to make a show.    location 29195
Clement of Alexandria, The Pedagogue, bk. 3, ch.4

{Sir 11:29; Sir 9:16}
Whence the Scripture most strenuously exhorts, "Introduce not everyone into your house, for the snares of the crafty are many." And in another place, "Let just men be thy guests, and in the fear of the Lord let thy boast remain."    location 29206
Clement of Alexandria, The Pedagogue, bk. 3, ch.4

{Jas 1:27; Deut 14:29; Ps 146:9; Isa 1:17, 23}
And though maintaining parrots and curlews, they do not receive the orphan child; but they expose children that are born at home, and take up the young of birds, and prefer irrational to rational creatures; although they ought to undertake the maintenance of old people with a character for sobriety,    location 29218
Clement of Alexandria, The Pedagogue, bk. 3, ch.4

{Jas 5:1-5; 1 Pet 1:18; Eph 4:17-19}
And they squander and throw away their wealth on fading dyes, and bought slaves; like crammed fowls scraping the dung of life.    location 29223
Clement of Alexandria, The Pedagogue, bk. 3, ch.4

{Baths, Roman}
[Rich women] cannot meet and cannot sweat without a multitude of vessels, although poor women who have no display equally enjoy their baths.    location 29231
Clement of Alexandria, The Pedagogue, bk. 3, ch.5

{1 Cor 9:25}
  The barbarians were more decent than the Greeks, being nearer to the state of nature, which is a better guide than pagan civilization. But see the interesting note of Rawlinson (Herod., vol. i. p. 125, ed. New York), who quotes Thucydides (i. 6) to prove the recent invasion of immodest exposure even among athletes. Our author has this same quotation in mind, for he almost translates it here.](source)
The ancient athletes, ashamed to exhibit a man naked, preserved their modesty by going through the contest in drawers;    location 29241
Clement of Alexandria, The Pedagogue, bk. 3, ch.5

{Mt 28:20; Heb 4:13; 2 Chr 16:9; Ps 33:13-15; Jn 1:3}
For so only shall one remain without falling, if he regard God as ever present with him.    location 29247
Clement of Alexandria, The Pedagogue, bk. 3, ch.5

{Lk 12:21}
Riches are then to be partaken of rationally, bestowed lovingly, not sordidly, or pompously;    location 29249
Clement of Alexandria, The Pedagogue, bk. 3, ch.5

{Mt 6:19-20}
He who has sold his worldly goods, and given them to the poor, finds the imperishable treasure, "where is neither moth nor robber."    location 29256
Clement of Alexandria, The Pedagogue, bk. 3, ch.5

{Lk 16:19-31}
haughty as he who was luxuriously clothed in purple and fine linen, and despised Lazarus, "he is miserable, and lives in trouble," and shall not live. Wealth seems to me to be like a serpent, which will twist round the hand and bite; unless one knows how to lay hold of it without danger by the point of the tail.    location 29258
Clement of Alexandria, The Pedagogue, bk. 3, ch.5

{Prov 11:24; Ps 112:9}
but the righteous alone is graceful, because grace is order, observing a due and decorous measure in managing and distributing.    location 29268
Clement of Alexandria, The Pedagogue, bk. 3, ch.5

{Prov 11:24; Ps 112:9}
"For there are those who sow and reap more," of whom it is written, "He hath dispersed, he hath given to the poor; his righteousness endureth forever." So that it is not he who has and keeps, but he who gives away, that is rich;    location 29269
Clement of Alexandria, The Pedagogue, bk. 3, ch.5

{Titus 1:15}
good things are the property only of good men; and Christians are good.    location 29272
Clement of Alexandria, The Pedagogue, bk. 3, ch.5

{Mt 7:7-8}
For he whose it is to desire nothing that is not in our power, and to obtain by asking from God what he piously desires, does he not possess much, nay all, having God as his everlasting treasure? "To him that asks," it is said, "shall be given, and to him that knocketh it shall be opened." If God denies nothing, all things belong to the godly.   location 29276
Clement of Alexandria, The Pedagogue, bk. 3, ch.5

{1 Tim 6:9-10; Lk 12:15-21; Prov 15:27; Prov 23:4; Prov 28:20}
Love of wealth displaces a man from the right mode of life, and induces him to cease from feeling shame at what is shameful; if only, like a beast, he has power to eat all sorts of things, and to drink in like manner, and to satiate in every way his lewd desires. And so very rarely does he inherit the kingdom of God.    location 29284
Clement of Alexandria, The Pedagogue, bk. 3, ch.7

{Mt 6:31; Phil 3:19}
For what end, then, are such dainty dishes prepared, but to fill one belly? The filthiness of gluttony is proved by the sewers    location 29286
Clement of Alexandria, The Pedagogue, bk. 3, ch.7

{Prov 3:5}
"But let alms and faith not fail thee," says the Scripture.    location 29289
Clement of Alexandria, The Pedagogue, bk. 3, ch.7

{1 Kings 19:4,6}
Look, for instance, to Elias the Thesbite, in whom we have a beautiful example of frugality, when he sat down beneath the thorn, and the angel brought him food. "It was a cake of barley and a jar of water." Such the Lord sent as best for him.    location 29290
Clement of Alexandria, The Pedagogue, bk. 3, ch.7

{Lk 10:4}
We, then, on our journey to the truth, must be unencumbered. "Carry not," said the Lord, "purse, nor scrip, nor shoes;" that is, possess not wealth, which is only treasured up in a purse; ..."stores," as if laying up produce in a bag, but share with those who have need. Do not trouble yourselves about horses and servants, who, as bearing burdens when the rich are travelling, are allegorically called shoes.    location 29292, 29293
Clement of Alexandria, The Pedagogue, bk. 3, ch.7

{Lk 16:16; 1 Jn 3:17-19}
He who climbs to the heavens by force, must carry with him the fair staff of beneficence, and attain to the true rest by sharing with those who are in distress.    location 29300
Clement of Alexandria, The Pedagogue, bk. 3, ch.7

{Prov 13:8}
"that the true riches of the soul are a man's ransom," that is, if he is rich, he will be saved by distributing it.    location 29302
Clement of Alexandria, The Pedagogue, bk. 3, ch.7

{Heb 11:13; Col 3:2}
Wherefore we have no country on earth, that we may despise earthly possessions.   location 29316
Clement of Alexandria, The Pedagogue, bk. 3, ch.8

{Eph 2:11,12}
The other people is the Gentile--useless; this is the people that followeth not Christ.   location 29338
Clement of Alexandria, The Pedagogue, bk. 3, ch.8

{Gen 19:24-28; 2 Pet 2:6; Jude 7}
The fate of the Sodomites was judgment to those who had done wrong, instruction to those who hear.    location 29347
Clement of Alexandria, The Pedagogue, bk. 3, ch.8

{Gen 19:24-28; 2 Pet 2:6; Jude 7}
The Sodomites having, through much luxury, fallen into uncleanness, practising adultery shamelessly, and burning with insane love for boys; the All-seeing Word, whose notice those who commit impieties cannot escape, cast His eye on them. Nor did the sleepless guard of humanity observe their licentiousness in silence; but dissuading us from the imitation of them, and training us up to His own temperance, and falling on some sinners, lest lust being unavenged, should break loose from all the restraints of fear, ordered Sodom to be burned, pouring forth a little of the sagacious fire on licentiousness; lest lust, through want of punishment, should throw wide the gates to those that were rushing into voluptuousness.    location 29348
Clement of Alexandria, The Pedagogue, bk. 3, ch.8

{2 Pet 2:6; Jude 7}
punishments and threats are for this end, that fearing the penalty we may abstain from sinning. I    location 29359
Clement of Alexandria, The Pedagogue, bk. 3, ch.8

{Gen 18:6; Gen 29:9}
She who emulates Sarah is not ashamed of that highest of ministries, helping wayfarers. For Abraham said to her, "Haste, and knead three measures of meal, and make cakes." "And Rachel, the daughter of Laban, came," it is said, "with her father's sheep." Nor was this enough; but to teach humility it is added, "for she fed her father's sheep."    location 29396
Clement of Alexandria, The Pedagogue, bk. 3, ch.10

{Gen 30:37}
Jacob fed the sheep of Laban that were left in his charge, having as a royal badge "a rod of storax," which aimed by its wood to change and improve nature.    location 29404
Clement of Alexandria, The Pedagogue, bk. 3, ch.10

{1 Cor 6:9-10; Col 2:20-23; Prov 30:8}
Our mode of life is not to accustom us to voluptuousness and licentiousness, nor to the opposite extreme, but to the medium between these, that which is harmonious and temperate, and free of either evil, luxury and parsimony.    location 29411
Clement of Alexandria, The Pedagogue, bk. 3, ch.10

{Mt 25:35-36; Isa 58:7; Jas 2:15-16}
attending to one's own wants is an exercise free of pride,--as, for example, putting on one's own shoes, washing one's own feet, and also rubbing one's self when anointed with oil. To render one who has rubbed you the same service in return, is an exercise of reciprocal justice; and to sleep beside a sick friend, help the infirm, and supply him who is in want, are proper exercises.    location 29413
Clement of Alexandria, The Pedagogue, bk. 3, ch.10

{Gen 18:8}
"And Abraham," it is said, "served up for three, dinner under a tree, and waited on them as they ate."    location 29416
Clement of Alexandria, The Pedagogue, bk. 3, ch.10

{1 Tim 2:9; 1 Pet 3:3; Rom 13:14}
Wherefore the wearing of gold and the use of softer clothing is not to be entirely prohibited. But irrational impulses must be curbed, lest, carrying us away through excessive relaxation, they impel us to voluptuousness.    location 29419
Clement of Alexandria, The Pedagogue, bk. 3, ch.11

{Rev 7:9; Rev 6:11; 1 Tim 2:9; 1 Pet 3:3}
The Pedagogue permits us, then, to use simple clothing, and of a white color, as we said before.    location 29427
Clement of Alexandria, The Pedagogue, bk. 3, ch.11

{Titus 2:12}
For, as in the case of the soldier, the sailor, and the ruler, so also the proper dress of the temperate man is what is plain, becoming, and clean.    location 29431
Clement of Alexandria, The Pedagogue, bk. 3, ch.11

{Lev 13-14}??
Whence also in the Law, the Law enacted by Moses about leprosy rejects what has many colors and spots, like the various scales of the snake. He therefore wishes man, no longer decking himself gaudily in a variety of colors, but white all over from the crown of the head to the sole of the foot, to be clean;    location 29432
Clement of Alexandria, The Pedagogue, bk. 3, ch.11

{1 Cor 11:14-15}
The Word prohibits us from doing violence to nature by boring the lobes of the ears.   location 29449
Clement of Alexandria, The Pedagogue, bk. 3, ch.11

{Rings}
The Word, then, permits them a finger-ring of gold. Nor is this for ornament, but for sealing things which are worth keeping safe in the house in the exercise of their charge of housekeeping.    location 29455
Clement of Alexandria, The Pedagogue, bk. 3, ch.11

{Eph 4:28}
For if all were well trained, there would be no need of seals, if servants and masters were equally honest. But since lack of training produces an inclination to dishonesty, we require seals.    location 29457
Clement of Alexandria, The Pedagogue, bk. 3, ch.11

{1 Pet 3:1-2}
But there are circumstances in which this strictness may relaxed. For allowance must sometimes be made in favor of those women who have not been fortunate in falling in with chaste husbands, and adorn themselves in order to please their husbands. But let desire for the admiration of their husbands alone be proposed as their aim. I would not have them to devote themselves to personal display, but to attract their husbands by chaste love for them--a powerful and legitimate charm. But since they wish their wives to be unhappy in mind, let the latter, if they would be chaste, make it their aim to allay by degrees the irrational impulses and passions of their husbands. And they are to be gently drawn to simplicity,    location 29459
Clement of Alexandria, The Pedagogue, bk. 3, ch.11

{Prov 31:10-31; Gen 2:18}
It is right, then, for men to repose confidence in their wives, and commit the charge of the household to them, as they are given to be their helpers in this.    location 29467
Clement of Alexandria, The Pedagogue, bk. 3, ch.11

{Sir 21:21}
to seal anything for the sake of safety, He (the Word) allows us a signet for this purpose only. Other finger-rings are to be cast off, since, according to the Scripture, "instruction is a golden ornament for a wise man."    location 29469
Clement of Alexandria, The Pedagogue, bk. 3, ch.11

{Ex 20:4}
*  [How this was followed, is proved by the early Christian devices of the catacombs, contrasted with the engraved gems from Pompeii, in the Museo Borbonico at Naples.](source)
And let our seals be either a dove, or a fish, or a ship scudding before the wind, or a musical lyre, which Polycrates used, or a ship's anchor, which Seleucus got engraved as a device; and if there be one fishing, he will remember the apostle, and the children drawn out of the water. For we are not to delineate the faces of idols*, we who are prohibited to cleave to them; nor a sword, nor a bow, following as we do, peace; nor drinking-cups, being temperate.    location 29478
Clement of Alexandria, The Pedagogue, bk. 3, ch.11

{Beard; Ps 133:2; Ezra 9:3;1 Chr 19:4-5; Isa 50:6}
For an ample beard suffices for men. And if one, too, shave a part of his beard, it must not be made entirely bare, for this is a disgraceful sight.    location 29485
Clement of Alexandria, The Pedagogue, bk. 3, ch.11

{Beard; 1 Chr 19:4-5}
the hair of the head, that it may not grow so long as to come down and interfere with the eyes, and that of the moustache similarly, which is dirtied in eating, is to be cut round, not by the razor, for that were not well-bred, but by a pair of cropping scissors. But the hair on the chin is not to be disturbed, as it gives no trouble, and lends to the face dignity and paternal terror.    location 29490
Clement of Alexandria, The Pedagogue, bk. 3, ch.11

{1 Tim 2:9; 1 Pet 3:3}
It is enough for women to protect their locks, and bind up their hair simply along the neck with a plain hair-pin, nourishing chaste locks with simple care to true beauty. For vulgar plaiting of the hair, and putting it up in tresses, contribute to make them look ugly, cutting the hair and plucking off it those treacherous braidings;    location 29498
Clement of Alexandria, The Pedagogue, bk. 3, ch.11

{Wigs}
But additions of other people's hair are entirely to be rejected,    location 29502
Clement of Alexandria, The Pedagogue, bk. 3, ch.11

{Dyeing the Hair}
Consequently neither is the hair to be dyed, nor grey hair to have its color changed. For neither are we allowed to diversify our dress. And above all, old age, which conciliates trust, is not to be concealed.    location 29508
Clement of Alexandria, The Pedagogue, bk. 3, ch.11

{Cosmetics; Gen 1:27}
But it is monstrous for those who are made in "the image and likeness of God," to dishonor the archetype by assuming a foreign ornament, preferring the mischievous contrivance of man to the divine creation.    location 29529
Clement of Alexandria, The Pedagogue, bk. 3, ch.11

{Prov 31:10-31; Titus 2:4-5; 1 Tim 2:9-10; 1 Pet 3:3-6}
For the labor of their own hands, above all, adds genuine beauty to women, exercising their bodies and adorning themselves by their own exertions; not bringing unornamental ornament wrought by others, which is vulgar and meretricious, but that of every good woman, supplied and woven by her own hands whenever she most requires. For it is never suitable for women whose lives are framed according to God, to appear arrayed in things bought from the market, but in their own home-made work. For a most beautiful thing is a thrifty wife, who clothes both herself and her husband with fair array of her own working;   location 29535
Clement of Alexandria, The Pedagogue, bk. 3, ch.11

{Judg 14:1-20; Judg 16:1-21; Gen 39:7-12}
The noble Samson was overcome by the harlot, and by another woman was shorn of his manhood. But Joseph was not thus beguiled by another woman. The Egyptian harlot was conquered.    location 29549
Clement of Alexandria, The Pedagogue, bk. 3, ch.11

{Prov 9:13-17}
And others, as if they had certain efflorescences, in order to appear comely in the eyes of spectators, stain their faces by adorning them with gay-colored unguents. Such a one is called by Solomon "a foolish and bold woman," who "knows not shame. She sits at the door of her house, conspicuously in a seat, calling to all that pass by the way, who go right on their ways;" by her style and whole life manifestly saying, "Who among you is very silly? let him turn to me." And those devoid of wisdom she exhorts, saying, "Touch sweetly secret bread, and sweet stolen water;"    location 29571
Clement of Alexandria, The Pedagogue, bk. 3, ch.11

{Jas 5:5}
Nor, when climbing uphill, are they to be shoved up by their domestics, as we see those that are more luxurious,    location 29589
Clement of Alexandria, The Pedagogue, bk. 3, ch.11

{1 Pet 2:18}
Nor is a man in health to use his servants as horses to bear him. For as it is enjoined on them, "to be subject to their masters with all fear, not only to the good and gentle, but also to the froward," as Peter says; so fairness, and forbearance, and kindness, are what well becomes the masters.    location 29592
Clement of Alexandria, The Pedagogue, bk. 3, ch.11
{1 Pet 4:3; Rom 13:13}
And let not men, therefore, spend their time in barbers' shops and taverns, babbling nonsense; and let them give up hunting for the women who sit near, and ceaselessly talking slander against many    location 29603
Clement of Alexandria, The Pedagogue, bk. 3, ch.11

{1 Pet 4:3; Rom 13:13; Eph 5:15-16}
The game of dice is to be prohibited, and the pursuit of gain, especially by dicing, which many keenly follow. Such things the prodigality of luxury invents for the idle.   location 29605
Clement of Alexandria, The Pedagogue, bk. 3, ch.11

{Lev 11:7; Isa 65:4; Isa 66:17}
the all-wise Pedagogue, by the mouth of Moses, recognizing companionship with bad men as swinish, forbade the ancient people to partake of swine; to point out that those who call on God ought not to mingle with unclean men, who, like swine, delight in corporeal pleasures, in impure food, and in itching with filthy pruriency after the mischievous delights of lewdness.    location 29609
Clement of Alexandria, The Pedagogue, bk. 3, ch.11

{Lev 11:13-14; Deut 14:12}
Further, He says: "Thou art not to eat a kite or swift-winged ravenous bird, or an eagle," meaning: Thou shalt not come near men who gain their living by rapine. And other things also are exhibited figuratively.    location 29611
Clement of Alexandria, The Pedagogue, bk. 3, ch.11

{Lev 11:3}
says again, speaking figuratively; for everything "which parts the hoof and chews the cud is clean." For the parting of the hoof indicates the equilibrium of righteousness, and ruminating points to the proper food of righteousness, the word, which enters from without, like food, by instruction, but is recalled from the mind, as from the stomach, to rational recollection. And the spiritual man, having the word in his mouth, ruminates the spiritual food;    location 29614
Clement of Alexandria, The Pedagogue, bk. 3, ch.11

{Ps 1:1} [LXX]
The Pedagogue will not then bring us to public spectacles; nor inappropriately might one call the racecourse and the theatre "the seat of plagues;"    location 29619
Clement of Alexandria, The Pedagogue, bk. 3, ch.11

{1 Pet 4:3; 1 Thess 5:22; Eph 5:3-17; Rom 12:2}
Let spectacles, therefore, and plays that are full of scurrility and of abundant gossip, be forbidden. For what base action is it that is not exhibited in the theatres? And what shameless saying is it that is not brought forward by the buffoons? And those who enjoy the evil that is in them, stamp the clear images of it at home.    location 29623
Clement of Alexandria, The Pedagogue, bk. 3, ch.11

{1 Pet 4:3; 1 Thess 5:22; Eph 5:3-17; Rom 12:2}
for cruel contests for glory which have been so fatal are not sport. No more is senseless expenditure of money, nor are the riots that are occasioned by them sport.    location 29628
Clement of Alexandria, The Pedagogue, bk. 3, ch.11

{Jn 1:4; Deut 30:19}
And how dost thou love thyself, if thou dost not love life?     location 29633
Clement of Alexandria, The Pedagogue, bk. 3, ch.11

{1 Cor 2:5-14}
And faith is the possession not of the wise according to the world, but of those according to God; and it is taught without letters; and its handbook, at once rude and divine, is called love--a spiritual book.    location 29634
Clement of Alexandria, The Pedagogue, bk. 3, ch.11

{Eph 4:25; Prov 11:1; Prov 20:10, 23; Lev 19:35-36; Deut 25:13-16, Mic 6:10-11}
Let not him who sells or buys aught name two prices for what he buys or sells; but stating the net price, and studying to speak the truth, if he get not his price, he gets the truth, and is rich in the possession of rectitude.    location 29637
Clement of Alexandria, The Pedagogue, bk. 3, ch.11

{Mt 5:33-37}
But, above all, let an oath on account of what is sold be far from you; and let swearing, too, on account of other things be banished.    location 29639
Clement of Alexandria, The Pedagogue, bk. 3, ch.11

{1 Cor 11:5-13; 1 Tim 2:9; Lk 17:1-2}
Woman and man are to go to church decently attired, with natural step, embracing silence, possessing unfeigned love, pure in body, pure in heart, fit to pray to God. Let the woman observe this, further. Let her be entirely covered, unless she happen to be at home. For that style of dress is grave, and protects from being gazed at. And she will never fall, who puts before her eyes modesty, and her shawl; nor will she invite another to fall into sin by uncovering her face. For this is the wish of the Word, since it is becoming for her to pray veiled.    location 29645
Clement of Alexandria, The Pedagogue, bk. 3, ch.11

{Rom 12:2; 2 Cor 6:14-18}
But now I know not how people change their fashions and manners with the place. As they say that polypi, assimilated to the rocks to which they adhere, are in color such as they; so, laying aside the inspiration of the assembly, after their departure from it, they become like others with whom they associate.    location 29653
Clement of Alexandria, The Pedagogue, bk. 3, ch.11

{1 Cor 5:11-13}
Nay, in laying aside the artificial mask of solemnity, they are proved to be what they secretly were. After having paid reverence to the discourse about God, they leave within [the church] what they have heard. And outside they foolishly amuse themselves with impious playing, and amatory quavering, occupied with flute-playing, and dancing, and intoxication, and all kinds of trash.    location 29655
Clement of Alexandria, The Pedagogue, bk. 3, ch.11

{Mt 8:22}
already, are these dead to God; burying their dead, that is, sinking themselves down to death.    location 29659
Clement of Alexandria, The Pedagogue, bk. 3, ch.11

{Holy Kiss; 1 Cor 16:20; Rom 16:16}
But love is not proved by a kiss, but by kindly feeling. But there are those, that do nothing but make the churches resound with a kiss, not having love itself within. For this very thing, the shameless use of a kiss, which ought to be mystic, occasions foul suspicions and evil reports. The apostle calls the kiss holy. When the kingdom is worthily tested, we dispense the affection of the soul by a chaste and closed mouth, by which chiefly gentle manners are expressed. But there is another unholy kiss, full of poison, counterfeiting sanctity.   location 29663
Clement of Alexandria, The Pedagogue, bk. 3, ch.11

{1 Jn 5:3}
And often kisses inject the poison of licentiousness. It is then very manifest to us, that a kiss is not love. For the love meant is the love of God. "And this is the love of God," says John, "that we keep His commandments;" not that we stroke each other on the mouth.   location 29668
Clement of Alexandria, The Pedagogue, bk. 3, ch.11

{Prov 4:25; 1 Cor 7:1; Prov 31:1}
But, above all, it seems right that we turn away from the sight of women. For it is sin not only to touch, but to look; and he who is rightly trained must especially avoid them. "Let thine eyes look straight, and thine eyelids wink right." For while it is possible for one who looks to remain stedfast; yet care must be taken against falling.    location 29676
Clement of Alexandria, The Pedagogue, bk. 3, ch.11

{Sir 9:8; Prov 6:25-29}
the affection which arises from the fire which we call love, leading to the fire which will never cease in consequence of sin.    location 29684
Clement of Alexandria, The Pedagogue, bk. 3, ch.11

{1 Tim 3:2}
I would counsel the married never to kiss their wives in the presence of their domestics.    location 29686
Clement of Alexandria, The Pedagogue, bk. 3, ch.12

{Jas 2:24-26}
And we shall find many examples also in other places,--as, for instance, respecting prayer: "Good works are an acceptable prayer to the Lord," says the Scripture.    location 29730
Clement of Alexandria, The Pedagogue, bk. 3, ch.12

{Rev 5:8; Jn 12:3; 2 Cor 2:15-16}
*[cf. Iirenæus, iv. 17, vol. i. 444]
"An odour of a sweet fragrance," it is said, "is the heart that glorifies Him who made it*." These are the crowns and sacrifices, aromatic odours, and flowers of God.    location 29744
Clement of Alexandria, The Pedagogue, bk. 3, ch.12

{Lk 17:3-4}
"If thy brother," it is said, "sin against thee, rebuke him; and if he repent, forgive him. If he sin against thee seven times in a day, and turn to thee the seventh time, and say, I repent, forgive him."    location 29746
Clement of Alexandria, The Pedagogue, bk. 3, ch.12

{Lk 3:14}
Also to the soldiers, by John, He commands, "to be content with their wages only;"   location 29747
Clement of Alexandria, The Pedagogue, bk. 3, ch.12

{Gal 3:28; Col 3:11; Eph 6:9; Col 4:1; Philemon 16}
Domestics, too, are to be treated like ourselves; for they are human beings, as we are. For God is the same to free and bond, if you consider.    location 29763
Clement of Alexandria, The Pedagogue, bk. 3, ch.12

{2 Cor 7:10-11}
For to sin is natural and common to all. But to return [to God] after sinning is characteristic not of any man, but only of a man of worth.    location 29768
Clement of Alexandria, The Pedagogue, bk. 3, ch.12

{2 Cor 3:311}
Such are the Laws of the Word, the consolatory words not on tables of stone which were written by the finger of the Lord, but inscribed on men's hearts, on which alone they can remain imperishable. Wherefore the tablets of those who had hearts of stone are broken, that the faith of the children may be impressed on softened hearts.    location 29774
Clement of Alexandria, The Pedagogue, bk. 3, ch.12

{Eph 5:26-27}
O nurslings of His blessed training! let us complete the fair face of the church; and let us run as children to our good mother [the church].    location 29816
Clement of Alexandria, The Pedagogue, bk. 3, ch.12

{Jn 17:21-23}
and praising thank the Alone Father and Son, Son and Father, the Son, Pedagogue and Teacher, with the Holy Spirit, all in One, in whom is all, for whom all is One, for whom is eternity, whose members we all are, whose glory the aeons are;    location 29838
Clement of Alexandria, The Pedagogue, bk. 3, ch.12

{Jn 1:1-2}
Word eternal, Age unending;    location 29869
Clement of Alexandria, The Pedagogue, bk. 3, ch.12

{Rev 5:12-13}
Unto God their hymn of praise, Jesus Christ!    location 29871
Clement of Alexandria, The Pedagogue, bk. 3, ch.12

{1 Pet 2:2; Rev 21:23; Isa 60:19-20}
O heavenly way, perennial Word, immeasurable Age, Eternal Light, Fount of mercy, performer of virtue; noble [is the] life of those who hymn God, O Christ Jesus, heavenly milk of the sweet breasts of the graces of the Bride, pressed out of Thy wisdom.   location 29889
Clement of Alexandria, The Pedagogue, bk. 3, ch.12 (hymn)

{Jn 15:25; Jn 15:19}
For what is there more unfair than to hate a thing of which you know nothing, even though it deserve to be hated? Hatred is only merited when it is known to be merited.   location 42192
Tertullian, Apology, ch.1

{Rom 1:8; 1 Pet 4:3-4; 1 Thess 1:8; 2 Cor 2:14}
By simply getting acquainted with it, they begin now to hate what they had formerly been, and to profess what they had formerly hated; and their numbers are as great as are laid to our charge. The outcry is that the State is filled with Christians--that they are in the fields, in the citadels, in the islands: they make lamentation, as for some calamity, that both sexes, every age and condition, even high rank, are passing over to the profession of the Christian faith; and yet for all, their minds are not awakened to the thought of some good they have failed to notice in it.   location 42199
Tertullian, Apology, ch.1

{1 Pet 3:14-16; Acts 5:41}
But what is there like this in the Christian's case? The only shame or regret he feels, is at not having been a Christian earlier. If he is pointed out, he glories in it; if he is accused, he offers no defence; interrogated, he makes voluntary confession; condemned he renders thanks.   location 42216
Tertullian, Apology, ch.1

{Roman Law}
When the charges made against us are made against others, they are permitted to make use both of their own lips and of hired pleaders to show their innocence.   location 42223
Tertullian, Apology, ch.2

{Acts 16:37; 1 Pet 2:19-20; Acts 22:25}
in fact, it is against the law to condemn anybody undefended and unheard. Christians alone are forbidden to say anything in exculpation of themselves,    location 42224
Tertullian, Apology, ch.2

{Persecution; Mt 10:18, 22; Ps 59:16; Phil 2:15-16}
instead of that, we find that even inquiry in regard to our case is forbidden. For the younger Pliny, when he was ruler of a province, having condemned some Christians to death, and driven some from their steadfastness, being still annoyed by their great numbers, at last sought the advice of Trajan, the reigning emperor, as to what he was to do with the rest, explaining to his master that, except an obstinate disinclination to offer sacrifices, he found in the religious services nothing but meetings at early morning for singing hymns to Christ and God, and sealing home their way of life by a united pledge to be faithful to their religion, forbidding murder, adultery, dishonesty, and other crimes. Upon this Trajan wrote back that Christians were by no means to be sought after; but if they were brought before him, they should be punished. O miserable deliverance,--under the necessities of the case, a self-contradiction! It forbids them to be sought after as innocent, and it commands them to be punished as guilty. It is at once merciful and cruel; it passes by, and it punishes.   location 42232
Tertullian, Apology, ch.2

{Roman Military}
Military stations are distributed through all the provinces for tracking robbers.   location 42241
Tertullian, Apology, ch.2

{Persecution; Rev 2:10, 13}
for, in the case of others denying, you apply the torture to make them confess--Christians alone you torture, to make them deny;    location 42245
Tertullian, Apology, ch.2

{Rom 1:29-32}
You play fast and loose with the laws. You wish him to deny his guilt, that you may, even against his will, bring him out blameless and free from all guilt in reference to the past! Whence is this strange perversity on your part?    location 42267
Tertullian, Apology, ch.2

{Persecution; Acts 5:41: 1 Pet 4:14; Jn 15:21}
to be called a "Christian" does not imply any crime, the name is surely very hateful, when that of itself is made a crime.   location 42280
Tertullian, Apology, ch.2


{Mt 10:22; Jn 15:21}
What are we to think of it, that most people so blindly knock their heads against the hatred of the Christian name; that when they bear favorable testimony to any one, they mingle with it abuse of the name he bears? "A good man," says one, "is Gaius Seius, only that he is a Christian." So another, "I am astonished that a wise man like Lucius should have suddenly become a Christian." Nobody thinks it needful to consider whether Gaius is not good and Lucius wise, on this very account that he is a Christian; or a Christian, for the reason that he is wise and good.   location 42282
Tertullian, Apology, ch.3

{Mt 5:11-12}
In the blindness of their hatred, they fall foul of their own approving judgment! "What a woman she was! how wanton! how gay! What a youth he was! how profligate! how libidinous!--they have become Christians!"    location 42289
Tertullian, Apology, ch.3

{Mt 5:21, 22, 34-36}
The wife, now chaste, the husband, now no longer jealous, casts out of his house; the son, now obedient, the father, who used to be so patient, disinherits; the servant, now faithful, the master, once so mild, commands away from his presence; it is a high offence for any one to be reformed by the detested name.   location 42291
Tertullian, Apology, ch.3

{Jn 15:18-21}
But Christian, so far as the meaning of the word is concerned, is derived from anointing. Yes, and even when it is wrongly pronounced by you "Chrestianus" (for you do not even know accurately the name you hate), it comes from sweetness and benignity. You hate, therefore, in the guiltless, even a guiltless name.   location 42296
Tertullian, Apology, ch.3

{Jn 15:18, Acts 11:26; 1 Pet 4:16}
But the special ground of dislike to the sect is, that it bears the name of its Founder.   location 42298
Tertullian, Apology, ch.3

{Jn 15:18, Acts 11:26; 1 Pet 4:16}
the mere name is assailed, and a sound alone brings condemnation on a sect and its author both, while of both you are ignorant, because they have such and such a designation, not because they are convicted of anything wrong.   location 42305
Tertullian, Apology, ch.3


{1 Pet 3:15-16}
We shall reply to the accusation of all the various crimes we are said to be guilty of in secret, such as we find them committing in the light of day, and as being guilty of which we are held to be wicked, senseless, worthy of punishment, deserving of ridicule.   location 42312
Tertullian, Apology, ch.4

{Jn 15:18-25}
Now first, when you sternly lay it down in your sentences, "It is not lawful for you to exist," and with unhesitating rigour you enjoin this to be carried out, you exhibit the violence and unjust domination of mere tyranny,    location 42316
Tertullian, Apology, ch.4

{Ancient Law}
There were laws, too, in old times, that parties against whom a decision had been given might be cut in pieces by their creditors; however, by common consent that cruelty was afterwards erased from the statutes,    location 42327
Tertullian, Apology, ch.4

{Prov 21:21; Prov 15:9}
How many laws lie hidden out of sight which still require to be reformed! For it is neither the number of their years nor the dignity of their maker that commends them, but simply that they are just;    location 42330
Tertullian, Apology, ch.4

{Ps 7:11; Ps 9:4; Jn 7:24; Lev 19:15; Isa 11:3-5}
for a judge never inflicts a righteous vengeance if he is not well assured that a crime has been committed;    location 42336
Tertullian, Apology, ch.4


{Pagan religion}
there was an old decree that no god should be consecrated by the emperor till first approved by the senate. Marcus AEmilius had experience of this in reference to his god Alburnus. And this, too, makes for our case, that among you divinity is allotted at the judgment of human beings. Unless gods give satisfaction to men, there will be no deification for them: the god will have to propitiate the man.   location 42342
Tertullian, Apology, ch.5

{Lk 3:1}
Tiberius accordingly, in whose days the Christian name made its entry into the world, having himself received intelligence from Palestine of events which had clearly shown the truth of Christ's divinity, brought the matter before the senate, with his own decision in favour of Christ. The senate, because it had not given the approval itself, rejected his proposal. Caesar held to his opinion, threatening wrath against all accusers of the Christians. Consult your histories; you will there find that Nero was the first who assailed with the imperial sword the Christian sect, making progress then especially at Rome. But we glory in having our condemnation hallowed by the hostility of such a wretch.   location 42344
Tertullian, Apology, ch.5

{Persecution; Rev. 1:9}
Domitian, too, a man of Nero's type in cruelty, tried his hand at persecution; but as he had something of the human in him, he soon put an end to what he had begun, even restoring again those whom he had banished.   location 42350
Tertullian, Apology, ch.5

{Jas 5:17-18}
So far from that, we, on the contrary, bring before you one who was their protector, as you will see by examining the letters of Marcus Aurelius, that most grave of emperors, in which he bears his testimony that that Germanic drought was removed by the rains obtained through the prayers of the Christians who chanced to be fighting under him. And as he did not by public law remove from Christians their legal disabilities, yet in another way he put them openly aside, even adding a sentence of condemnation, and that of greater severity, against their accusers.   location 42354
Tertullian, Apology, ch.5

{Persecution}
which Trajan to some extent made naught by forbidding Christians to be sought after;    location 42359
Tertullian, Apology, ch.5


{1 Pet 4:3; Rom 13:12-13; Lk 21:34}
What has become of the laws repressing expensive and ostentatious ways of living? which forbade more than a hundred asses to be expended on a supper, and more than one fowl to be set on the table at a time, and that not a fatted one; which expelled a patrician from the senate on the serious ground, as it was counted, of aspiring to be too great, because he had acquired ten pounds of silver; which put down the theatres as quickly as they arose to debauch the manners of the people; which did not permit the insignia of official dignities or of noble birth to be rashly or with impunity usurped?    location 42365
Tertullian, Apology, ch.6

{1 Tim 2:9-10; Rom 13:12-13; Eph 5:18}
their woollen cloaks for the plays. I see now no difference between the dress of matrons and prostitutes. In regard to women, indeed, those laws of your fathers, which used to be such an encouragement to modesty and sobriety, have also fallen into desuetude, when a woman had yet known no gold upon her save on the finger, which, with the bridal ring, her husband had sacredly pledged to himself; when the abstinence of women from wine was carried so far, that a matron, for opening the compartments of a wine cellar, was starved to death by her friends,--while in the times of Romulus, for merely tasting wine, Mecenius killed his wife, and suffered nothing for the deed.   location 42373
Tertullian, Apology, ch.6

{Eph 5:18}
With reference to this also, it was the custom of women to kiss their relatives, that they might be detected by their breath.   location 42377
Tertullian, Apology, ch.6

{Heb 13:4; Eph 4:17-19; 1 Pet 1:14}
Where is that happiness of married life, ever so desirable, which distinguished our earlier manners, and as the result of which for about 600 years there was not among us a single divorce? Now, women have every member of the body heavy laden with gold; wine-bibbing is so common among them, that the kiss is never offered with their will; and as for divorce, they long for it as though it were the natural consequence of marriage. The laws, too, your fathers in their wisdom had enacted concerning the very gods themselves, you their most loyal children have rescinded.   location 42378
Tertullian, Apology, ch.6



{Eph 4:17-19; Rom 13:12-13}
In your dress, in your food, in your style of life, in your opinions, and last of all in your very speech, you have renounced your progenitors. You are always praising antiquity, and yet every day you have novelties in your way of living.   location 42386
Tertullian, Apology, ch.6


{Mt 5:11}
we are accused of observing a holy rite in which we kill a little child and then eat it;    location 42394
Tertullian, Apology, ch.7

{Mt 5:11}
in which, after the feast, we practise incest,    location 42395
Tertullian, Apology, ch.7

{Jn 7:24}
Either bring, then, the matter to the light of day if you believe it, or give it no credit as having never inquired into it.   location 42397
Tertullian, Apology, ch.7

{2 Cor 1:8-10; 2 Cor 4:8; Jn 15:20; Rom 8:35-36; 2 Cor 11:23-27}
We are daily beset by foes, we are daily betrayed; we are oftentimes surprised in our meetings and congregations.   location 42403
Tertullian, Apology, ch.7

{False accusations against Christians}
Whoever happened withal upon an infant wailing, according to the common story? Whoever kept for the judge, just as he had found them,    location 42403
Tertullian, Apology, ch.7

{1 Pet 1:15-16; Pagan Religion}
it is also a universal custom in religious initiations to keep the profane aloof, and to beware of witnesses,    location 42410
Tertullian, Apology, ch.7


{Lev 20:2-5; 2 Kings 21:6}
Children were openly sacrificed in Africa to Saturn as lately as the proconsulship of Tiberius, who exposed to public gaze the priests suspended on the sacred trees overshadowing their temple--so many crosses on which the punishment which justice craved overtook their crimes, as the soldiers of our country still can testify who did that very work for that proconsul.   location 42452
Tertullian, Apology, ch.9


{Abortion; Ex 20:13; Ps 139:13-16}
In our case, murder being once for all forbidden, we may not destroy even the foetus in the womb, while as yet the human being derives blood from other parts of the body for its sustenance. To hinder a birth is merely a speedier man-killing; nor does it matter whether you take away a life that is born, or destroy one that is coming to the birth. That is a man which is going to be one; you have the fruit already in its seed.   location 42467
Tertullian, Apology, ch.9

{Acts 15:28-29}
Blush for your vile ways before the Christians, who have not even the blood of animals at their meals of simple and natural food; who abstain from things strangled and that die a natural death, for no other reason than that they may not contract pollution, so much as from blood secreted in the viscera. To clench the matter with a single example, you tempt Christians with sausages of blood, just because you are perfectly aware that the thing by which you thus try to get them to transgress they hold unlawful. And how unreasonable it is to believe that those, of whom you are convinced that they regard with horror the idea of tasting the blood of oxen, are eager after blood of men;    location 42480
Tertullian, Apology, ch.9

{Jn 9:41}
those who do not see what is, think they see what is not.   location 42501
Tertullian, Apology, ch.9


{1 Thess 1:9; 1 Jn 5:21; Rev 13:8, 12; Jn 15:18-21; Mt 5:11}
"You do not worship the gods," you say; "and you do not offer sacrifices for the emperors." ...  So we are accused of sacrilege and treason. This is the chief ground of charge against us--nay, it is the sum-total of our offending;    location 42505
Tertullian, Apology, ch.10

{Pagan Religion}
No one of your gods is earlier than Saturn: from him you trace all your deities,   location 42517
Tertullian, Apology, ch.10

{Ancient world}
last of all, the whole of Italy, after having borne the name of Oenotria, was called Saturnia from him. He first gave you the art of writing, and a stamped coinage, and thence it is he presides over the public treasury.   location 42523
Tertullian, Apology, ch.10

{Pagan customs}
For who does not speak of heaven and earth as father and mother, in a sort of way of veneration and honor? or from the custom which prevails among us of saying that persons of whom we have no knowledge, or who make a sudden appearance, have fallen from the skies?   location 42526
Tertullian, Apology, ch.10

"
{Greek Mythology}
lowest depths of Tartarus,--the place which you regard, with many, as the prison-house of infernal punishments. For into this dread place are wont to be cast all who offend against filial piety, and such as are guilty of incest with sisters, and seducers of wives, and ravishers of virgins, and boy-polluters, and men of furious tempers, and murderers, and thieves, and deceivers; all, in short, who tread in the footsteps of your gods, not one of whom you can prove free from crime or vice, save by denying that they had ever a human existence.   location 42559
Tertullian, Apology, ch.11


{Persecution; Heb 11:36-38}
You put Christians on crosses and stakes: what image is not formed from the clay in the first instance, set on cross and stake? The body of your god is first consecrated on the gibbet. You tear the sides of Christians with your claws; but in the case of your own gods, axes, and planes, and rasps are put to work more vigorously on every member of the body. We lay our heads upon the block; before the lead, and the glue, and the nails are put in requisition, your deities are headless.   location 42580
Tertullian, Apology, ch.12

{Persecution}
We are burned in the flames;    location 42584
Tertullian, Apology, ch.12

{Persecution}
We are condemned to the mines;    location 42584
Tertullian, Apology, ch.12

{Persecution; Rev 1:9}
We are banished to islands;    location 42585
Tertullian, Apology, ch.12

{Ps 115:4-8; Ps 135:15-18}
For, as we have already shown, every god depended on the decision of the senate for his godhead.   location 42598
Tertullian, Apology, ch.13

{Ps 115:4-8; Ps 135:15-18}
The family deities you call Lares, you exercise a domestic authority over, pledging them, selling them, changing them--making sometimes a cooking-pot of a Saturn, a firepan of a Minerva, as one or other happens to be worn down, or broken in its long sacred use, or as the family head feels the pressure of some more sacred home necessity.   location 42599
Tertullian, Apology, ch.13

{Isa 44:9-20; Ps 115:4-8; Ps 135:15-18}
In like manner, by public law you disgrace your state gods, putting them in the auction-catalogue, and making them a source of revenue.   location 42601
Tertullian, Apology, ch.13

{Ps 115:4-8; Ps 135:15-18}
In the case of the gods, on the other hand, the sacredness is great in proportion to the tribute which they yield; nay, the more sacred is a god, the larger is the tax he pays. Majesty is made a source of gain.   location 42605
Tertullian, Apology, ch.13

{Eph 5:18}
You demand a price for the privilege of standing on temple ground,    location 42606
Tertullian, Apology, ch.13

{Eph 5:18}
In what respect does the funeral feast differ from the feast of Jupiter?    location 42610
Tertullian, Apology, ch.13

{Eph 5:18-19}
But when you adore Larentina, a public prostitute--I could have wished that it might at least have been Lais or Phryne--among your Junos, and Cereses,    location 42613
Tertullian, Apology, ch.13

{Acts 8:9-24}
when you instal in your Pantheon Simon Magus, giving him a statue and the title of Holy God;    location 42614
Tertullian, Apology, ch.13


{Mal 1:7-8}
I wish now to review your sacred rites; and I pass no censure on your sacrificing, when you offer the worn-out, the scabbed, the corrupting; when you cut off from the fat and the sound the useless parts, such as the head and the hoofs, which in your house you would have assigned to the slaves or the dogs;    location 42618
Tertullian, Apology, ch.14

{Jn 10:31-33}
In fact, for this very thing Socrates was condemned to death, that he overthrew the worship of the gods.   location 42632
Tertullian, Apology, ch.14


{Hos 4:10-19; 2 Kings 23:7}
But if I add--it is what all know and will admit as readily to be the fact--that in the temples adulteries are arranged, that at the altars pimping is practised, that often in the houses of the temple-keepers and priests, under the sacrificial fillets, and the sacred hats, and the purple robes, amid the fumes of incense, deeds of licentiousness are done,    location 42651
Tertullian, Apology, ch.15

{2 Cor 6:16-18}
It is certainly among the votaries of your religion that the perpetrators of sacrilege are always found, for Christians do not enter your temples even in the day-time.   location 42654
Tertullian, Apology, ch.15

{False accusations against Christians}
like some others, you are under the delusion that our god is an ass's head. Cornelius Tacitus first put this notion into people's minds.   location 42660
Tertullian, Apology, ch.16

{Skip}
In the fifth book of his histories, beginning the (narrative of the) Jewish war with an account of the origin of the nation; and theorizing at his pleasure about the origin,    location 42661
Tertullian, Apology, ch.16

{Skip}
they were in extremity from thirst; but taking the guidance of the wild asses, which it was thought might be seeking water after feeding, they discovered a fountain, and thereupon in their gratitude they consecrated a head of this species of animal. And as Christianity is nearly allied to Judaism, from this, I suppose, it was taken for granted that we too are devoted to the worship of the same image.   location 42663
Tertullian, Apology, ch.16

{Gal 6:14; 1 Cor 2:2}
Then, if any of you think we render superstitious adoration to the cross, in that adoration he is sharer with us. If you offer homage to a piece of wood at all, it matters little what it is like when the substance is the same: it is of no consequence the form, if you have the very body of the god.   location 42672
Tertullian, Apology, ch.16

{Ancient world; Cross}
you also worship victories, for in your trophies the cross is the heart of the trophy*. The camp religion of the Romans is all through a worship of the standards, a setting the standards above all gods.   location 42677
Tertullian, Apology, ch.16

{False accusations against Christians; Ps 148:3}
Others, again, certainly with more information and greater verisimilitude, believe that the sun is our god. ....The idea no doubt has originated from our being known to turn to the east in prayer.   location 42680, 42681
Tertullian, Apology, ch.16

{Acts 20:7; 1 Cor 16:1-2}
In the same way, if we devote Sunday to rejoicing, from a far different reason than Sun-worship, we have some resemblance to those of you who devote the day of Saturn to ease and luxury, though they too go far away from Jewish ways, of which indeed they are ignorant.   location 42683
Tertullian, Apology, ch.16

{False accusations against Christians}
*Onocoites. If with Oehler, Onochoietes, the meaning is "asinarius sacerdos" (Oehler).(source)
who exhibited a picture with this inscription: The God of the Christians, born of an ass*. He had the ears of an ass, was hoofed in one foot, carried a book, and wore a toga. Both the name and the figure gave us amusement.   location 42686
Tertullian, Apology, ch.16


{1 Cor 8:6; Heb 11:3; Heb 1:2}
The object of our worship is the One God, He who by His commanding word, His arranging wisdom, His mighty power, brought forth from nothing this entire mass of our world,    location 42692
Tertullian, Apology, ch.17

{Jn 1:18; Ex 33:20; Jn 6:46; Col 1:15; 1 Tim 6:16; 1 Jn 4:12}
The eye cannot see Him, though He is (spiritually) visible. He is incomprehensible, though in grace He is manifested.   location 42694
Tertullian, Apology, ch.17

{Rom 1:19}
And this is the crowning guilt of men, that they will not recognize One, of whom they cannot possibly be ignorant.   location 42699
Tertullian, Apology, ch.17

{Ps 95:3; Job 11:13; Heb 11:6}
yet, whenever the soul comes to itself, as out of a surfeit, or a sleep, or a sickness, and attains something of its natural soundness, it speaks of God; using no other word, because this is the peculiar name of the true God. "God is great and good"--"Which may God give," are the words on every lip. It bears witness, too, that God is judge, exclaiming, "God sees," and, "I commend myself to God," and, "God will repay me." O noble testimony of the soul by nature Christian!    location 42702
Tertullian, Apology, ch.17


{2 Tim 3:16}
But, that we might attain an ampler and more authoritative knowledge at once of Himself, and of His counsels and will, God has added a written revelation    location 42708
Tertullian, Apology, ch.18

{Heb 1:1; 1 Pet 1:10-12; Isa 44:24}
For from the first He sent messengers into the world,--men whose stainless righteousness made them worthy to know the Most High, and to reveal Him,--men abundantly endowed with the Holy Spirit, that they might proclaim that there is one God only who made all things, who formed man from the dust of the ground    location 42710
Tertullian, Apology, ch.18

{Jn 5:28,29; Rom 2:6-11}
For from the first He sent messengers into the world...that they might proclaim...the rules appointed by Him for securing His favor, as well as the recompense in store for the ignoring, forsaking and keeping them.  location 42714
Tertullian, Apology, ch.18

{Rev 20:12-15}
as being about at the end of all to adjudge His worshippers to everlasting life, and the wicked to the doom of fire at once without ending and without break, raising up again all the dead from the beginning, reforming and renewing them with the object of awarding either recompense.   location 42714
Tertullian, Apology, ch.18

{Rom 10:9-10}
We are of your stock and nature: men are made, not born, Christians.   location 42717
Tertullian, Apology, ch.18

{1 Cor 12:28}
The preachers of whom we have spoken are called prophets, from the office which belongs to them of predicting the future.   location 42717
Tertullian, Apology, ch.18

{Septuagint; Rom 11:28}
applied to the Jews for their writings--I mean the writings peculiar to them and in their tongue, which they alone possessed, for from themselves, as a people dear to God for their fathers' sake, their prophets had ever sprung, and to them they had ever spoken. Now in ancient times the people we call Jews bare the name of Hebrews, and so both their writings and their speech were Hebrew. But that the understanding of their books might not be wanting, this also the Jews supplied to Ptolemy; for they gave him seventy-two interpreters--men whom the philosopher Menedemus, the well-known asserter of a Providence, regarded with respect as sharing in his views. The same account is given by Aristaeus. So the king left these works unlocked to all, in the Greek language. To this day, at the temple of Serapis, the libraries of Ptolemy are to be seen, with the identical Hebrew originals in them. The Jews, too, read them publicly. Under a tribute-liberty, they are in the habit of going to hear them every Sabbath.   location 42722
Tertullian, Apology, ch.18


{2 Cor 7:1; Lk 11:39; Mt 15:16-20; Mt 5:8}
For what profit is it to know the truth in words, and to pollute the flesh and perform the works of evil? Or what profit can purity of the flesh bring, if truth be not in the soul? For these rejoice with one another, and are united and allied to bring man face to face with God. location 1059 
Irenaeus Proof of the Apostolic Preaching.

{Ex 3:14; Ps 1:1}
The Word says to Moses: "I am He that is;" [63] but they that worship not the God that is, these are the ungodly. "And has not stood in the way of sinners:" but sinners are those who have the knowledge of God and keep not His commandments; location 1064 
Irenaeus Proof of the Apostolic Preaching.

{Apostles Creed}
We must hold the rule of the faith without deviation, [65] and do the commandments of God, believing in God and fearing Him as Lord and loving Him as Father. location 1070 
Irenaeus Proof of the Apostolic Preaching.

{Apostles Creed}
Now faith occasions this for us; even as the Elders, the disciples of the Apostles, [66] have handed down to us. First of all it bids us bear in mind that we have received baptism for the remission of sins, in the name of God the Father, and in the name of Jesus Christ, the Son of God, who was incarnate and died and rose again, and in the Holy Spirit of God. And that this baptism is the seal of eternal life, and is the new birth unto God, that we should no longer be the sons of mortal men, but of the eternal and perpetual God; location 1075 
Irenaeus Proof of the Apostolic Preaching.

{Apostles Creed}
And therefore it is right first of all to believe that there is One God, the Father, who made and fashioned all things, and made what was not that it should be, and who, containing all things, alone is uncontained. location 1084 
Irenaeus Proof of the Apostolic Preaching.

{Apostles Creed}
5. Thus then there is shown forth [71] One God, the Father, not made, invisible, creator of all things; above whom there is no other God, and after whom there is no other God. And, since God is rational, therefore by (the) Word He created the things that were made; [72] and God is Spirit, and by (the) Spirit He adorned all things: as also the prophet says: By the Word of the Lord were the heavens established, and by his Spirit all their power. location 1087 
Irenaeus Proof of the Apostolic Preaching, 5.

{Prov 8:1-31; Jn 1:14; Rev 19:13; Eph 1:17}
rightly and fittingly is the Word called the Son, and the Spirit the Wisdom of God. location 1093 
Irenaeus Proof of the Apostolic Preaching.

{1 Cor 8:6; Col 1:16}
One God, the Father, who is over all and through all and in its all. For over all is the Father; and through all is the Son, for through Him all things were made by the Father; and in us all is the Spirit, location 1095 
Irenaeus Proof of the Apostolic Preaching.

{Apostles Creed}
God, the Father, not made, not material, invisible; one God, the creator of all things: this is the first point [76] of our faith. The second point is: The Word of God, Son of God, Christ Jesus our Lord, who was manifested to the prophets location 1101 
Irenaeus Proof of the Apostolic Preaching.

{Apostles Creed}
And the third point [of our faith] is: The Holy Spirit, through whom the prophets prophesied, and the fathers learned the things of God, location 1105 
Irenaeus Proof of the Apostolic Preaching.

{1 Cor 2:13-14; Jn 15:26; Jn 6:44; Jn 14:6}
Without the Spirit it is not possible to behold the Word of God, nor without the Son can any draw near to the Father location 1110 
Irenaeus Proof of the Apostolic Preaching.

{Apostles Creed}
for none shall escape and be delivered from His judgment, neither Jew nor Gentile, nor believer that has sinned, nor angel: location 1120 
Irenaeus Proof of the Apostolic Preaching.

{Rom 2:6; Rev 20:12-13; Mt 16:26; Rev 22:12}
the righteous judgment of God, who shall render to every man according to his works. location 1124 
Irenaeus Proof of the Apostolic Preaching.

{Isa 11:2}
9. Now this world is encompassed by seven heavens, [87] in which dwell powers and angels and archangels, doing service to God, the Almighty and Maker of all things: not as though He was in need, but that they may not be idle and unprofitable and ineffectual. [88] Wherefore also the Spirit of God is manifold in (His) indwelling, [89] and in seven forms of service [90] is He reckoned by the prophet Isaiah, as resting on the Son of God, that is the Word, in His coming as man. location 1127 
Irenaeus Proof of the Apostolic Preaching, 9

{Gen 1:26-28}
[Man] was free and self-controlled, being made by God for this end, that he might rule all those things that were upon the earth. location 1149 
Irenaeus Proof of the Apostolic Preaching.

{Gen 1:29-31; Gen 2:7-8; Gen 3:6; Rom 5:12}
[Adam] was (but) small; for he was a child; [102] and it was necessary that he should grow, and so come to (his) perfection. And, that he might have his nourishment and growth with festive and dainty food, He prepared him a place better than this world, [103] excelling in air, beauty, light, food, plants, fruit, water, and all other necessaries of life, and its name is Paradise. And so fair and good was this Paradise, that the Word of God continually resorted thither, and walked and talked with the man, figuring beforehand the things that should be in the future, (namely) that He should dwell with him and talk with him, and should be with men, teaching them righteousness. But man was a child, not yet having his understanding perfected; wherefore also he was easily led astray by the deceiver. location 1154 
Irenaeus Proof of the Apostolic Preaching.

{Gen 2:21-22}
But God Himself cast a trance upon Adam and made him sleep; and, that work might be accomplished from work, since there was no sleep in Paradise, this was brought upon Adam by the will of God; and God took one of Adam's ribs and filled up the flesh in its place, location 1166 
Irenaeus Proof of the Apostolic Preaching.

{Gen 2:25; Gen 2:7}
14. And Adam and Eve--for that is the name of the woman--were naked, and were not ashamed ; [106] for there was in them an innocent and childlike mind, and it was not possible for them to conceive and understand anything of that which by wickedness through lusts and shameful desires is born in the soul. For they were at that time entire, preserving their own nature; since they had the breath of life which was breathed on their creation: and, while this breath remains in its place and power, it has no comprehension and understanding of things that are base. And therefore they were not ashamed, kissing and embracing each other in purity after the manner of children. location 1173 
Irenaeus Proof of the Apostolic Preaching, 14.

{Gen 2:16-17; Gen 3:19}
A law was given to him [Adam] by God, in order that he might perceive that he had as lord the Lord of all. ...[Adam] should ever remain such as he was, that is to say, immortal; but, if he should not keep it, he should become mortal and be dissolved to earth from whence his formation had been taken. location 1181, 1182 
Irenaeus Proof of the Apostolic Preaching.

{Gen 3:6; Gen 3:17-19; Gen 3:23-24; Gen 3:14-15; Rev 12:10}
[Adam] was disobedient to God, being led astray by the angel who, for the great gifts of God which He had given to man, was envious and jealous of him, [107] and both brought himself to nought and made man sinful, persuading him to disobey the commandment of God. So the angel, becoming by his falsehood the author and originator of sin, himself was struck down, having offended against God, and man he caused to be cast out from Paradise. And, because through the guidance of his disposition he apostatized and departed from God, he was called Satan, according to the Hebrew word; that is, Apostate: [108] but he is also called Slanderer. Now God cursed the serpent which carried and conveyed the Slanderer; and this malediction came on the beast himself and on the angel hidden and concealed in him, even on Satan; location 1187 
Irenaeus Proof of the Apostolic Preaching.

{Gen 4:8-12}
[Abel] died, slain by his brother; signifying thenceforth that certain should be persecuted and oppressed and slain, the unrighteous slaying and persecuting the righteous. And upon this God was angered yet more, and cursed Cain; and it came to pass that everyone of that race in successive generations was made like to the begetter. location 1200 
Irenaeus Proof of the Apostolic Preaching.

{Gen 6:1-6}
Illicit unions took place upon the earth, since angels were united with the daughters of the race of mankind; and they bore to them sons who for their exceeding greatness were called giants. And the angels brought as presents to their wives teachings of wickedness, [110] in that they brought them the virtues of roots and herbs, dyeing in colors and cosmetics, the discovery of rare substances, love-potions, aversions, amours, concupiscence, constraints of love, spells of bewitchment, and all sorcery and idolatry hateful to God; location 1206 
Irenaeus Proof of the Apostolic Preaching.

{Gen 9:22-27}
20. Now of these one fell under a curse, and the two (others) inherited a blessing by reason of their works. For the younger of them, [111] who was called Ham, having mocked his father, location 1217 
Irenaeus Proof of the Apostolic Preaching, 20.

{Gen 9:22-27; Deut 27:16; Josh 9:23; 1 Kings 9:20-21; Gen 10:6-20}
and all the posterity that came of him he involved in the curse; whence it came about that his whole race after him were accursed, and in sins they increased and multiplied. But Shem and Japheth, his brothers, because of their piety towards their father obtained a blessing. Now the curse of Ham, wherewith his father Noah cursed him, is this: "Cursed be Ham the child; [112] a servant shall he be unto his brethren." This having come upon his race, he begat many descendants upon the earth, (even) for fourteen generations, growing up in a wild condition; and then his race was cut off by God, being delivered up to judgment. For the Canaanites and Hittites and Peresites and Hivites and Amorites and Jebusites and Gergasites and Sodomites, the Arabians also and the dwellers in Phoenicia, all the Egyptians and the Libyans, [113] are of the posterity of Ham, who have fallen under the curse; for the curse is of long duration over the ungodly. location 1219, 1221 
Irenaeus Proof of the Apostolic Preaching.

{Gen 9:27; Gen 10:21-31}
And even as the curse passed on, so also the blessing passed on to the race of him who was blessed, to each in his own order. For first of them was Shem blessed in these words: location 1227 
Irenaeus Proof of the Apostolic Preaching.

{Gen 11:10-32; Gen 12:1-3}
The power of the blessing lies in this, that the God and Lord of all should be to Shem a peculiar possession of worship. And the blessing extended and reached unto Abraham, who was reckoned as descended in the tenth generation from the race of Shem: and therefore the Father and God of all was pleased to be called the God of Abraham and the God of Isaac and the God of Jacob; because the blessing of Shem reached out and attached itself to Abraham. location 1229 
Irenaeus Proof of the Apostolic Preaching.

{Gen 9:27; Gen 10:2-5; Isa 66:19}
Now the blessing of Japheth is in this manner: "God shall enlarge unto Japheth, and he shall dwell in the house of Shem, and Ham [115] shall be his servant." That is to say: In the end of the ages he blossomed forth, at the appearing of the Lord, through the calling of the Gentiles, when God enlarged unto them the calling; and their sound went out into all the earth, and their words to the end of the world. The enlarging, then, is the calling from among the Gentiles, that is to say, the Church. [116] And he dwells in the house of Shem; that is, in the inheritance of the fathers, receiving in Christ Jesus the right of the firstborn. 
So in the rank in which each was blessed, in that same order through his posterity he received the fruit of the blessing. location 1232-1238 
Irenaeus Proof of the Apostolic Preaching.

{Gen 11:2-4}
23. And they arose and came from the land of the east; and, as they went through the land, they chanced upon the land of Shinar, which was exceeding broad; where they took in hand to build a tower. location 1255
 Irenaeus Proof of the Apostolic Preaching,23.

{Gen 11:3-6}
And the building was made with burnt bricks and bitumen: and the boldness of their audacity went forward, as they were all of one mind and consent, location 1257 
Irenaeus Proof of the Apostolic Preaching.

{Gen 11:28}
the blessing first of all came to Shem, whose race dwelt in the east and held the land of the Chaldeans. 
Irenaeus Proof of the Apostolic Preaching.

{Gen 12:1}
24. In process of tithe, that is to say, in the tenth generation after the Flood, Abraham appeared, [120] seeking for the God who by the blessing of his ancestor was due and proper to him. [121] And when, urged by the eagerness of his spirit, he went all about the world, searching where God is, and failed to find out; God took pity on him who alone was silently seeking Him; and He appeared unto Abraham, making Himself known by the Word, as by a beam of light. For He spoke with him from heaven, and said unto him: Get thee out of thy country, and from thy kindred, location 1261-1263 
Irenaeus Proof of the Apostolic Preaching,24.

{Gen 12:4-6}
And he [Abraham] believed the heavenly voice, being then of ripe age, even seventy [122] years old, and having a wife; and together with her he went forth from Mesopotamia, taking with him Lot, the son of his brother who was dead. And when he came into the land which now is called Judæa, in which at that time dwelt seven tribes descended from Ham, God appeared unto him in a vision location 1268 
Irenaeus Proof of the Apostolic Preaching.

{Rom 4:3, 9, 22, 23; Gen 15:6; Gal 3:6; Jas 2:23}
He bare witness unto him [Abraham] by the Holy Spirit, saying in the Scripture: (Rom. iv. 3) "And Abraham believed, and it was counted unto him for righteousness." And he was uncircumcised when this witness was borne; and, that the excellency of his faith should be made known by a sign, He gave him circumcision, a seal of the righteousness [123] of that faith which he had in uncircumcision. And after this there was born to him a son, Isaac. location 1278 
Irenaeus Proof of the Apostolic Preaching.

{Ex 3:6: Mt 22:32}
And of Isaac was Jacob born; and in this manner the original blessing of Shem reached to Abraham, and from Abraham to Isaac, and from Isaac to Jacob, the inheritance of the Spirit being imparted to them: for He was called the God of Abraham and the God of Isaac and the God of Jacob. location 1284 
Irenaeus Proof of the Apostolic Preaching.

{Gen 46:3-4; Gen 28:14; Deut 26:5}
and Jacob with all his seed removed and dwelt in Egypt: and the number of all that migrated was threescore and fifteen souls : and in four hundred years, as the oracle had declared beforehand, they became six hundred and sixty thousand. location 1288 
Irenaeus Proof of the Apostolic Preaching.

{Ex 12:1-13; Ex 12:21-27; 1 Cor 5:7}
revealing in a mystery the sufferings of Christ by the sacrifice of a lamb without spot, and giving its blood to be smeared on the houses of the Hebrews as a sure precaution. And the name of this mystery is Passion, [124] the source of deliverance. location 1293 
Irenaeus Proof of the Apostolic Preaching.

{Ex 31:18}
tables of stone, written with the finger of God (now the finger of God is that which is stretched forth from the Father in the Holy Spirit); location 1299 
Irenaeus Proof of the Apostolic Preaching.

{Acts 7: 44; Heb 8:5; Heb 9: 23-24; Num 9:15; Num 17:7}
And the tabernacle of witness he constructed by the command of God, the visible form on earth of those things which are spiritual and invisible in the heavens, and a figure of the form of the Church, and a prophecy of things to come: location 1300 
Irenaeus Proof of the Apostolic Preaching.

{Num 13:1-16}
Moses chose a man from every tribe, and sent them to search out the land and the cities therein and the dwellers in the cities. At that time God revealed to him the Name which alone is able to save them that believe thereon; and Moses changed the name of Oshea the son of Nun, one of them that were sent, and named him Jesus: [126] and so he sent them forth with the power of the Name, location 1307 
Irenaeus Proof of the Apostolic Preaching.

{Num 13:25-33; Num 14:1-38}
And when they believed not, but the people still continued in the same unbelief, God changed and altered their way, that they should wander desolate and sore smitten in the desert. And according to the days that they were in going and returning who had spied out the land--and these were forty in number--setting a year for a day, He kept them in the wilderness for the space of forty years; and none of those who were full grown and had understanding counted He worthy to enter into the land because of their unbelief, save only the two who had testified of the inheritance, Jesus the son of Nun and Caleb the son of Jephunneh, and those who were quite young and knew not the right hand and the left. So all the unbelieving multitude perished and were consumed in the wilderness, receiving one by one the due reward of their lack of faith: but the children, growing up in the course of forty years, filled up the number of the dead. location 1316-1321 
Irenaeus Proof of the Apostolic Preaching.

{Deut 17:18; Deut 21:22-23; Gal 3:13; 1 Pet 2:24; Mt 27:57; Mk 15:42}
28. When the forty years were fulfilled, ... imposing on them as it were a new legislation, adding to that which was made before. And this was called Deuteronomy*: [128] and in it were written many prophecies concerning our Lord Jesus Christ and concerning the people, and also concerning the calling of the Gentiles and concerning the kingdom. location 1322-1326 
Irenaeus Proof of the Apostolic Preaching, 28.

{Rom 1:3-4; Col 1:15-17; Eph 1:10; Heb 1:2}
that after the flesh He might be the son of David, who was the son of Abraham by a long succession; but according to the spirit Son of God, pre-existing [130] with the Father, begotten before all the creation of the world, and at the end of the times appearing to all the world as man, the Word of God, gathering up in Himself all things that are in heaven and that are on earth. location 1338 
Irenaeus Proof of the Apostolic Preaching.

{2 Cor 5:18-20; Rom 5:12-21}
So then He united man with God, and established a community of union [131] between God and man; since we could not in any other way [132] participate in incorruption, save by His coming among us. For so long as incorruption was invisible and unrevealed, it helped us not at all therefore it became visible, [133] that in all respects we might participate in the reception of incorruption. And, because in the original formation [134] of Adam all of us were tied and bound up with death through his disobedience, it was right that through the obedience of Him who was made man for us we should be released from death: and because death reigned over the flesh, it was right that through the flesh it should lose its force and let man go free from its oppression. location 1343 
Irenaeus Proof of the Apostolic Preaching.

{Jn 1:14; Heb 2:14-15; 1 Cor 15:45}
So the Word was made flesh, that, through that very flesh which sin had ruled and dominated, it should lose its force and be no longer in us. And therefore our Lord took that same original formation as (His) entry into flesh, so that He might draw near and contend on behalf of the fathers, [135] and conquer by Adam that which by Adam had stricken us down. location 1348 
Irenaeus Proof of the Apostolic Preaching.

{Gen 2:5,7}
32. Whence then is the substance of the first formed (man)? From the Will and the Wisdom of God, and from the virgin earth. [136] For God had not sent rain, the Scripture says, upon the earth, before man was made; and there was no man to till the earth. From this, then, while it [the earth] was still virgin, location 1352 
Irenaeus Proof of the Apostolic Preaching, 32

{Mt 1:23; 1 Cor 15:45-48; Gen 1:27}
So then the Lord, summing up afresh this man, took the same dispensation of entry into flesh, being born from the Virgin by the Will and the Wisdom of God; that He also should show forth the likeness of Adam's entry into flesh [137] and there should be that which was written in the beginning, [138] man after the image and likeness of God. location 1356 
Irenaeus Proof of the Apostolic Preaching.

{Gen 2:6, Mt 1:38}
33. And just as through a disobedient virgin man was stricken down and fell into death, so through the virgin who was obedient to the Word of God man was reanimated and received life. location 1360 
Irenaeus Proof of the Apostolic Preaching,33

{Lk 15:4-7; Heb 2:14}
[139] For the Lord came to seek again the sheep that was lost; [140] and man it was that was lost: and for this cause there was not made some other formation, [141] but in that same which had its descent from Adam He preserved the likeness of the (first) formation. location 1361 
Irenaeus Proof of the Apostolic Preaching

{1 Cor 15:45-57; Rom 5:12-21; Lk 1:26-55}
For it was necessary that Adam should be summed up in Christ, that mortality might be swallowed up and overwhelmed by immortality; and Eve summed up in Mary, that a virgin should be a virgin's intercessor, [143] and by a virgin's obedience undo and put away the disobedience of a virgin. location 1363 
Irenaeus Proof of the Apostolic Preaching

{Gal 3:13; Deut 21:23; Isa 50:6}
34. And the trespass which came by the tree was undone by the tree of obedience, [144] when, hearkening unto God, the Son of man was nailed to the tree; thereby putting away the knowledge of evil and bringing in and establishing the knowledge of good: now evil it is to disobey God, even as hearkening unto God is good. And for this cause the Word spoke by Isaiah the prophet, announcing beforehand that which was to come--for therefore are they prophets, because they proclaim what is to come [145] : by him then spoke the Word thus: "I refuse not, nor gainsay: I gave my back to scourging, and my cheeks to smiting." location 1367 
Irenaeus Proof of the Apostolic Preaching,34


{Phil 2:8; Rom 5:19; Eph 3:18}
So then by the obedience wherewith He obeyed even unto death, hanging on the tree, He put away the old disobedience which was wrought in the tree. Now seeing that He is the Word of God Almighty, who in unseen wise in our midst is universally extended in all the world, and encompasses its length and breadth and height and depth [147] -for by the Word of God the whole universe is ordered and disposed--in it is crucified the Son of God, inscribed crosswise upon it all: location 1372 
Irenaeus Proof of the Apostolic Preaching

{Rom 4:3; Rom 1:17; Gen 15:6; Gal 3:6-14; Jas 2:23; Hab 2:4; Heb 10:38}
and by the same faith with Abraham justified the Gentiles. For Abraham believed God, and it was counted unto him for righteousness. (cf. Rom. iv. 3) In like manner we also are justified by faith in God: for the just shall live by faith. location 1383
 Irenaeus Proof of the Apostolic Preaching

{Gal 3:6-29; Rom 3:21-28}
Now not by the Law is the promise to Abraham, but by faith: for Abraham was justified by faith: and for a righteous man the Law is not made. In like manner we also are justified not by the Law, but by faith, which is witnessed to in the Law and in the Prophets, whom the Word of God presents to us. location 1386 
Irenaeus Proof of the Apostolic Preaching

{Rom 1:3; Mt 1:1; Deut 28:4; Lk 1:32-33; 2 Sam 7:16}
36. And He fulfilled the promise to David; for to him God had promised that of the fruit of his body He would raise up an eternal King, [150] whose kingdom should have no end. And this King is Christ, the Son of God, who became the Son of man; that is, who became the fruit of that virgin who had her descent from David. And for this cause the promise was, "Of the fruit of thy body" [151] -that He might declare the peculiar uniqueness of Him, who was the fruit of the virgin body that was of David, location 1391 
Irenaeus Proof of the Apostolic Preaching,36

{Lk 4:18; Isa 42:6-7}
38. But God the Father was very merciful: He sent His creative [152] Word, who in coming to deliver us came to the very place and spot in which we had lost life, and broke the bonds of our fetters. And His light appeared and made the darkness of the prison disappear, and hallowed our birth and destroyed death, loosing those same fetters in which we were enchained. location 1402
 Irenaeus Proof of the Apostolic Preaching, 38

{Isa 9:6}
40. Thus then the Word of God in all things hath the pre-eminence ; [157] for that He is true man and Wonderful Counselor and Mighty God; [158] calling men anew to fellowship with God, that by fellowship with Him we may partake of incorruption. location 1423 
Irenaeus Proof of the Apostolic Preaching, 40

{Jn 20:21-22; Mt 28:19-20; Acts 1:8; Acts 26:17-18}
His disciples, the witnesses of all His good deeds, and of His teachings and His sufferings and death and resurrection, and of His ascension into heaven after His bodily [161] resurrection--these were the apostles, who after (receiving) the power of the Holy Spirit were sent forth by Him into all the world, and wrought the calling of the Gentiles, showing to mankind the way of life, to turn them from idols and fornication and covetousness, cleansing their souls and bodies by the baptism of water and of the Holy Spirit; which Holy Spirit they had received of the Lord, and they distributed and imparted It to them that believed; and thus they ordered and established the churches. location 1432
 Irenaeus Proof of the Apostolic Preaching

{1 Pet 1:10-12; 1 Cor 13:13}
By faith and love and hope they [the apostles] established that which was foretold by the prophets, the calling of the Gentiles, location 1437 
Irenaeus Proof of the Apostolic Preaching

{2 Pet 3:11-14}
And they [the apostles] counseled them by the word of truth to keep their flesh undefiled unto the resurrection and their soul unstained. location 1441 
Irenaeus Proof of the Apostolic Preaching

{Gen 10:1-5; Isa 66:19}
This is the fruit of the blessing of Japheth, in the calling of the Gentiles, made manifest through the Church, location 1446 
Irenaeus Proof of the Apostolic Preaching

{Gen 1:1; Ps 110:3}
Moses, who was the first that prophesied [164] says in Hebrew: Baresith bara Elowin basan benuam samenthares. And this, translated into our language, [165] is: "The Son in the beginning: God established then the heaven and the earth." [166] This Jeremiah the prophet also testified, saying thus: "Before the morning-star I begat thee: and before the sun (is) thy name." location 1453 
Irenaeus Proof of the Apostolic Preaching

{Gen 18:2, 23-33; Gen 19:1}
Now two of the three were angels; but one was the Son of God, with whom also Abraham spoke, pleading on behalf of the men of Sodom, location 1470 
Irenaeus Proof of the Apostolic Preaching

{Gen 19:1-25}
the two angels entered into Sodom, and Lot received them. And then the Scripture says: "And the Lord rained upon Sodom and Gomorrah brimstone and fire from the Lord out of heaven: location 1472 
Irenaeus Proof of the Apostolic Preaching

{Gen 19:24-25; 2 Pet 2:6; Jude 7}
having received from Him who rules over all the power to punish the men of Sodom. location 1477 
Irenaeus Proof of the Apostolic Preaching

{Gen 28:12-17; Acts 7:49; Isa 66:1; Jn 1:18; Ex 33:20; Jn 6:46; Col 1:15; 1 Tim 6:16; 1 Jn 4:12}
45. And Jacob, when he went into Mesopotamia, saw Him in a dream, standing upon the ladder, that is the tree which was set up from earth to heaven; [172] for thereby they that believe on Him go up to the heavens. For His sufferings are our ascension on high. And all such visions point to the Son of God, speaking with men and being in their midst. For it was not the Father of all, who is not seen by the world, the Maker of all who has said: "Heaven is my throne, and earth is my footstool: what house will ye build me, or what is the place of my rest?" (Acts vii. 49) and who comprehends the earth with his hand, and with his span the heaven [173] -it was not He that came and stood in a very small space and spoke with Abraham; but the Word of God, location 1478 
Irenaeus Proof of the Apostolic Preaching,45

{Ex 14:15-31}
bringing us out from the power of the Egyptians, that is, from all idolatry and impiety; location 1490 
Irenaeus Proof of the Apostolic Preaching

{Num 20:7-11; 1 Cor 10:4; Ps 78:15-16; Isa 48:21}
For in them the Word of God prepared and rehearsed beforehand the things concerning us. Then He set forth in types beforehand that which was to be; how in very truth He has brought us out from the cruel service of the Gentiles, and a stream of water in the desert has He made to flow forth in abundance from a rock; and that rock is Himself; and has given twelve fountains, that is, the teaching of the twelve apostles. And the obstinate unbelievers He brought to an end and consumed in the wilderness; but those who believed on Him, and in malice were children, [174] He made to enter into the inheritance of the fathers; location 1492 
Irenaeus Proof of the Apostolic Preaching

{Nicene Creed; 1 Tim 6:16; Ps 45:6: Heb 1:8}
47. So then the Father is Lord and the Son is Lord, [177] and the Father is God and the Son is God; for that which is begotten of God is God. [178] And so in the substance and power of His being there is shown forth one God; but there is also according to the economy of our redemption both Son and Father. Because to created things the Father of all is invisible and unapproachable, [179] therefore those who are to draw near to God must have their access to the Father through the Son. And yet more plainly and evidently does David speak concerning the Father and the Son as follows: "Thy throne, O God is for ever and ever." location 1502 
Irenaeus Proof of the Apostolic Preaching,47

{Heb 1:8-9; Isa 61:1,3}
For the Son, as being God, receives from the Father, that is, from God, [181] the throne of the everlasting kingdom, and the oil of anointing above His fellows. The oil of anointing is the Spirit, [182] wherewith He has been anointed; and His fellows are prophets and righteous men and apostles, location 1508 
Irenaeus Proof of the Apostolic Preaching

{Ps 110:3-4}
"from the womb before the morning-star I begat thee. The Lord sware and will not repent: Thou art a priest for ever after the order of Melchisedek." location 1515 
Irenaeus Proof of the Apostolic Preaching

{Isa 45:1}
49. And again Isaiah the prophet says: "Thus saith the Lord God to my Anointed the Lord [LXX]), [186] whose right hand I have held, that the Gentiles should hearken before him." location 1522
Irenaeus Proof of the Apostolic Preaching,49 

{2 Pet 1:21; 1 Pet 1:10-12}
for it is not a man who speaks the prophecies; but the Spirit of God, assimilating and likening Himself to the persons represented, speaks in the prophets, and utters the words sometimes from Christ and sometimes from the Father. [187] location 1536 
Irenaeus Proof of the Apostolic Preaching

{Isa 49:5}
so also after this manner by Isaiah: "And now thus saith the Lord, who formed me as his servant from the womb, to gather Jacob and to gather Israel unto him: and I shall be glorified before the Lord, and my God shall be a strength unto me." location 1540
 Irenaeus Proof of the Apostolic Preaching

{Gen 32:28; Gen 35:10; 1 Kings 18:31; 2 Kings 17:34}
For the people of the Jews is called Israel in the Hebrew language, from Jacob their father, who was the first to be called Israel: and Gentiles He calls the whole of mankind. location 1548 
Irenaeus Proof of the Apostolic Preaching

{Phil 2:7; Acts 3:13; 1 Cor. 11:3; Jn 8:28}
And that the Son of the Father calls Himself servant, (this is) on account of His subjection to the Father: for among men also every son is servant of his father. location 1549 
Irenaeus Proof of the Apostolic Preaching

{Isa 7:14}
"Therefore the Lord himself shall give you a sign: behold, the virgin shall conceive and shall bring forth a son, and ye shall call him Emmanuel" location 1559 
Irenaeus Proof of the Apostolic Preaching

{Mt 1:23, 25; Isa. 7:14-16}
So he proclaimed His birth from a virgin; and that He was truly man he declared beforehand by His eating; and also because he called Him the child; and further by giving Him a name; for this is the custom also for one that is born. [192] And His name is two-fold: in the Hebrew tongue Messiah Jesus, and in ours Christ Savior. location 1561 
Irenaeus Proof of the Apostolic Preaching

{Isa 61:1; Mt 3:16,17}
For He was named Christ, because through Him the Father anointed and adorned all things; and because on His coming as man He was anointed with the Spirit of God and His Father. As also by Isaiah He says of Himself: "The Spirit of the Lord is upon me: wherefore he hath anointed me to preach good tidings to the poor. location 1564 
Irenaeus Proof of the Apostolic Preaching

{Lk 2:11; Acts 13:23; 2 Tim 1:10; 1 Jn 4:14}
And (He was named) Savior for this, that He became the cause of salvation to those who at that time were delivered by Him from all sicknesses and from death, [193] and to those who afterwards believed on Him the author of salvation in the future and for evermore. location 1567 
Irenaeus Proof of the Apostolic Preaching

{Mt 1:23; Isa 7:14}
54. For this cause then is He Savior. Now Emmanuel is, being interpreted, With you God ; [194] or as a yearning cry [195] uttered by the prophet, such as this: "With us shall be God" location 1570 
Irenaeus Proof of the Apostolic Preaching,54

{Isa 66:7}
And yet again concerning His birth the same prophet says in another place: "Before she that travailed gave birth, and before the pains of travail came on, she escaped and was delivered of a man-child." Thus he showed that His birth from the virgin was unforeseen and unexpected. [197] location 1575 
Irenaeus Proof of the Apostolic Preaching

{Isa 9:6}
And again the same prophet says: "Unto us a son is born, and unto us a child is given: [198] and his name shall be called Wonderful Counselor, Mighty God." [199] 
Irenaeus Proof of the Apostolic Preaching

{Isa 9:6}
55. He calls Him Wonderful Counselor, meaning of the Father: whereby it is declared that the Father works all things together with Him; location 1578 
Irenaeus Proof of the Apostolic Preaching,55

{Gen 1:27; Isa 9:6}
"And God said, Let us make man after our image and likeness." For there is seen in this place the Father speaking to the Son, [200] the Wonderful Counselor of the Father. Moreover He is also our Counselor, giving advice; not compelling as God, [201] even though He is Mighty God, (as) he says; but giving advice that we should forsake ignorance and acquire knowledge, and depart from error and come to the truth, and put away corruption and receive incorruption. location 1583
 Irenaeus Proof of the Apostolic Preaching

{Isa 9:5-7}
56. And again Isaiah says: "And they shall wish that they had been burned with fire: for unto us a child is born, and unto us a son is given; whose government is upon his shoulders, and his name is called Angel of great counsel. For I will bring peace upon the rulers, again peace and health unto him. Great is his rule, and of his peace there is no bound, location 1587 
Irenaeus Proof of the Apostolic Preaching,56

{Rev 1:7; 2 Thess 1:6-9; Rev 6:15-17}
But they shall wish that they had been burned with fire (is said) of those who believe not on Him, and who have done to Him all that they have done: for they shall say in the judgment, "How much better that we had been burned with fire before the Son of God was born, than that, when He was born, we should not have believed on Him." location 1593 
Irenaeus Proof of the Apostolic Preaching

{Rev 6:15-17; Joel 1:15}
Because for those who died before Christ appeared there is hope that in the judgment of the risen [204] they may obtain salvation, even such as feared God and died in righteousness and had in them the Spirit of God, as the patriarchs and prophets and righteous men. But for those who after Christ's appearing believed not on Him, there is a vengeance without pardon in the judgment. location 1595
Irenaeus Proof of the Apostolic Preaching

{Isa 9:6; Ps 22:7}
Now in this: "Whose government is upon his shoulder," the cross is in a figure declared, on which He was nailed back. [205] For that which was and is a reproach to Him, and for His sake to us, [206] even the cross, this same is, says he, His government, being a sign of His kingdom. location 1597 
Irenaeus Proof of the Apostolic Preaching

{Gen 49:10}
Moses in Genesis says thus: "There shall not fail a prince from Judah, nor a leader from his loins, until he shall come for whom it remaineth; [209] and he shall be the expectation of the Gentiles." location 1603 
Irenaeus Proof of the Apostolic Preaching

{Gen 49:10-11}
And there failed not a prince among them and a leader, until the coming of Christ. But from the time of His coming the might of the quiver was captured, [211] the land of the Jews was given over into subjection to the Romans, and they had no longer a prince or king of their own. For He was come, for whom remaineth in heaven the kingdom; [212] who also washed his robe in wine, and his garment in the blood of the grape. His robe as also His garment are those who believe on Him, [213] whom also He cleansed, redeeming us by His blood. And His blood is said to be blood of the grape: for even as the blood of the grape no man makes, but God produceth, and makes glad them that drink thereof, so also His flesh and blood no man wrought, but God made. location 1607
Irenaeus Proof of the Apostolic Preaching

{Jn 7:36; Rev 21:6; Rev 22:17; Isa 44:3; Isa 55:1}
who also makes glad them that drink of Him, that is to say, who receive His Spirit, (even) everlasting gladness. location 1615 
Irenaeus Proof of the Apostolic Preaching

{Num 24:17}
58. And again Moses says: "There shall rise a star out of Jacob; and a leader [214] shall be raised up out of Israel;" showing yet more plainly that the dispensation of His coming in flesh should be among the Jews. location 1619 
Irenaeus Proof of the Apostolic Preaching,58

{Num 24:17; Mt 2:1-11}
coming down from heaven, took upon Him this economy of dispensation: for the star appeared in heaven. And by leader he means king, because He is the King of all the redeemed. And at His birth the star appeared to the Magi who dwelt in the east; and thereby they learned that Christ was born; and they came to Judea, led by the star; until the star came to Bethlehem where Christ was born, and entered the house wherein was laid the child, wrapped in swaddling clothes; and it stood over His head, [215] declaring to the Magi the Son of God the Christ. location 1621
Irenaeus Proof of the Apostolic Preaching 

{Isa 11:10}
"And in that day there shall be a root of Jesse, and he that riseth up to rule the Gentiles: in him shall the Gentiles hope: and his rising up [220] shall be honor." By these words he states that He was born from her who was of the race of David and of Abraham. location 1635 
Irenaeus Proof of the Apostolic Preaching

{Num 17:10; Heb 9:4}
Now (as to) the rod: for this cause also Moses with [221] a rod showed the mighty works to Pharaoh: and with other men also the rod is a sign of rule. And by flower he means His flesh; [222] for from spirit it budded forth, as we have said before. 
Irenaeus Proof of the Apostolic Preaching

{Mt 11:29; Jas 4:6; Prov 3:34; 1 Pet 5:5; Ps 138:6; Jas 2:1-9}
60. Now, Not according to opinion shall he judge, and not according to speech shall he reprove: but he shall judge judgment for the humble, and shall show mercy to the humble on the earth--by this) he the more establishes and declares His godhead. [223] For to judge without respect of persons and partiality, and not as favoring the illustrious, but affording to the humble worthy and like and equal treatment, accords with the height and summit of the righteousness of God: for God is influenced and moved by none, save only the righteous.  location 1637 
Irenaeus Proof of the Apostolic Preaching,60

{Isa 11:6-9; Isa 65:25}
61. Now as to the union and concord and peace of the animals of different kinds, [224] which by nature are opposed and hostile to each other, the Elders say that so it will be in truth at the coming of Christ, when He is to reign over all. For already in a symbol he announces the gathering together in peace and concord, through the name of Christ, of men of unlike races and (yet) of like dispositions. For, when thus united, on the righteous, who are likened to calves and lambs and kids and sucking children, those inflict no hurt at all who in the former time were, through their rapacity, like wild beasts in manners and disposition, location 1647 
Irenaeus Proof of the Apostolic Preaching,61

{Titus 3:3-5; 2 Cor 5:17}
And this has come to pass already. For those who were before exceeding wicked, so that they left no work of ungodliness undone, learning of Christ and believing on Him, have at once believed and been changed, location 1654 
Irenaeus Proof of the Apostolic Preaching

{Rom 15:12}
And he says: Rising up to rule the Gentiles, because He is to die and rise again, and be confessed and believed as the Son of God (and) King. On this account he says: And His rising up shall be honor: that is, glory; for then was He glorified as God, when He rose. location 1657 
Irenaeus Proof of the Apostolic Preaching

{Acts 15:16; Am 9:11}
62. Wherefore again the prophet says: [226] In that day I will raise up the tabernacle of David that is fallen : that body [227] of Christ, which, as we have said before, is born of David, he plainly declares as after death rising from the dead. For the body is called a tabernacle. [228] location 1659
Irenaeus Proof of the Apostolic Preaching,62

{Lk 2:4}
But Bethlehem is the native place [230] of David: so that not only in respect of the Virgin who bore Him is He of David's race, but also in respect of His birth in Bethlehem the native place of David. location 1669 
Irenaeus Proof of the Apostolic Preaching

{Lk 1:32-33; Dan 2:44; Dan 7:14, 18, 27}
But none of the sons of David reigned for evermore, nor was their kingdom for evermore; for it was brought to nought. But the king that was born of David, He is Christ. location 1675
Irenaeus Proof of the Apostolic Preaching

{Zech 9:9; Zeph 3:14; Lam 1:6; Isa 3:16}
And by the daughter of Sion he means Jerusalem. location 1683 
Irenaeus Proof of the Apostolic Preaching

{Isa 53:4}
Isaiah says thus: "He took our infirmities and bare our sicknesses:" (Isa. liii. 4) that is to say, He shall take, and shall bear. For there are passages in which the Spirit of God through the prophets recounts things that are to be as having taken place. location 1688 
Irenaeus Proof of the Apostolic Preaching

{Ps 38:8; Isa 53:4}
By these words it is declared that He was tormented; as also David says--"And I was tormented." [237] Now David was never tormented, but Christ (was), when the command was given that He should be crucified. And again by Isaiah His Word says: "I gave my back to scourging, and my cheeks to smiting:" location 1711 
Irenaeus Proof of the Apostolic Preaching

{Lam 3:30}
And Jeremiah the prophet says the same, thus: "He shall give his cheek to the smiter: he shall be filled with reproaches." All these things Christ suffered. location 1714 
Irenaeus Proof of the Apostolic Preaching

{Rom 4:25}
"and the Lord delivered him up to our sins." It is manifest therefore that by the will of the Father these things occurred to Him for the sake of our salvation. location 1719
Irenaeus Proof of the Apostolic Preaching

{Isa 53:8; Acts 8:33}
And when the prophet says: "In the humiliation his judgment was taken away," he signifies the appearance of His humiliation: according to the form of the abasement was the taking away of judgment. And the taking away of judgment is for some unto salvation, and to some unto the torments of perdition. For there is a taking away for a person, and also from a person. So also with the judgment--those for whom it is taken away have it unto the torments of their perdition: but those from whom it is taken away are saved by it. Now those took away to themselves the judgment who crucified Him, and when they had done this to Him believed not on Him: for through that judgment which was taken away by them they shall be destroyed with torments. And from them that believe on Him the judgment is taken away, and they are no longer under it. And the judgment is that which by fire will be the destruction of the unbelievers at the end of the world. location 1722
Irenaeus Proof of the Apostolic Preaching 

{Isa 53:8}
For He who endured all this has an undeclarable generation; [240] for by generation He means descent; (for) He who is His Father is undeclarable and unspeakable. location 1732 
Irenaeus Proof of the Apostolic Preaching

{Lam 4:20}
That, being (the) Spirit of God, Christ was to become a suffering man the Scripture declares; and is, as it were, amazed and astonished at His sufferings, that in such manner He was to endure sufferings, under whose shadow we said that we should live. And by shadow he means His body. [242] For just as a shadow is made by a body, so also Christ's body was made by His Spirit. [243] location 1738 
Irenaeus Proof of the Apostolic Preaching

{Lam 4:20}
And he named Christ's body a shadow, because the Spirit overshadowed it, as it were, with glory and covered it. [244] Moreover oftentimes when the Lord passed by, they laid those who were held by divers diseases in the way, and on whomsoever His shadow fell, location 1743 
Irenaeus Proof of the Apostolic Preaching

{Isa 57:1}
72. And again the same prophet (says) thus concerning the sufferings of Christ: Behold how the righteous is destroyed, and no man layeth it to heart; and righteous men are taken away, and no man understandeth. For from the face of iniquity is the taking away of the righteous: peace shall be his burial, he hath been taken away from the midst. And who else is perfectly righteous, but the Son of God, who makes righteous and perfects them that believe on Him, who like unto Him are persecuted and put to death? [246] But in saying: Peace shall be his burial, he declares how on account of our redemption He died: for it is in the peace of redemption: and (also he declares) that by His death those who aforetime were enemies and opposed to one another, believing with one accord upon Him, should have peace with one another, location 1745
 Irenaeus Proof of the Apostolic Preaching,72

{Ps 21:4}
Moreover because He appeared no more after His death and burial, the prophet declares that after dying and rising again He was to remain immortal, (saying) thus: He asked life and thou gavest (it) him, and length of days for ever and ever. location 1753 
Irenaeus Proof of the Apostolic Preaching

{Ps 3:5}
73. And again David says thus concerning the death and resurrection of Christ: "I laid me down and slept: I awaked, for the Lord received me."  [247] David said not this of himself, for he was not raised after death: By sleep he means death; for He arose again. location 1759
Irenaeus Proof of the Apostolic Preaching,73

{Acts 4:25-26; Ps 2:1-2}
74. And again David (says) thus concerning the sufferings of Christ: Why did the Gentiles rage, and the people imagine vain things? Kings rose up on the earth, and princes were gathered together, against the Lord and his Anointed. (Cf. Acts iv 25 ff.) For Herod the king of the Jews and Pontius Pilate, the governor of Claudius Caesar, [248] came together and condemned Him to be crucified. location 1762 
Irenaeus Proof of the Apostolic Preaching,74

{Mt 2:3; Mt 27:20,24}
For Herod feared, as though He were to be an earthly king, lest he should be expelled by Him from the kingdom. But Pilate was constrained by Herod and the Jews that were with him against his will to deliver Him to death: (for they threatened him) if he should not rather do this [249] than act contrary to Cæsar, location 1767 
Irenaeus Proof of the Apostolic Preaching

{Ps 44:9-16}
And further concerning the sufferings of Christ the same prophet says: "Thou hast repelled and despised us; and hast cast away thine Anointed. Thou hast broken the covenant of my [250] servant; thou hast cast his holiness to the ground. Thou hast overthrown all his hedges; thou hast made his strongholds to tremble. [251] They that pass on the way have ravaged him; he is become a reproach to his neighbors. Thou hast exalted the right hand of his oppressors; thou hast made his enemies to rejoice over him. Thou hast turned away the help of his sword, and gavest him not a hand in the battle." location 1770
Irenaeus Proof of the Apostolic Preaching

{Isa 53:10-11}
That He should endure these things, and that too by the will of the Father, he manifestly declared: for by the will of the Father He was to endure sufferings. location 1776
Irenaeus Proof of the Apostolic Preaching

{2 Kings 17:4} ???
77. Again He says in the Twelve Prophets, [253] "And they bound him and brought him as a present to the king." For Pontius Pilate was governor of Judæa, and he had at that time resentful enmity against Herod the king of the Jews. [254] But then, when Christ was brought to him bound, Pilate sent Him to Herod, location 1783 
Irenaeus Proof of the Apostolic Preaching,77

{1 Pet 3:19,20; Eph 4:8-10}
78. And in Jeremiah He thus declares His death and descent into hell, saying: "And the Lord the Holy One of Israel, remembered his dead, which aforetime fell asleep in the dust of the earth; and he went down unto them, to bring the tidings of his salvation, to deliver them." [not in LXX or MT] [255] In this place He also renders the cause of His death: for His descent into hell was the salvation of them that had passed away. location 1788
 Irenaeus Proof of the Apostolic Preaching,78

{Ps 22:14,16-17; Ps 119:120}
And yet more manifestly David says: "Hunting-dogs encompassed me: [257] the assembly of evil-doers came about me. They pierced my hands and my feet." And again he says: "My heart became even as wax melting in the midst of my body; [258] and they put asunder [259] my bones." And again he says: "Spare my soul from the sword and nail my flesh: for the assembly of evil-doers hath risen up against me." [260] (Ps. cxix 120; xxii. 16.) In these words with manifest clearness he signifies that He should be crucified. location 1794 
Irenaeus Proof of the Apostolic Preaching

{Deut 28:66}
And Moses says this same thing to the people, thus: "And thy life shall be hanged up before thine eyes, and thou shalt fear by day and by night, and thou shalt not believe in thy life." location 1800
Irenaeus Proof of the Apostolic Preaching 

{Ps 68:17-18}
83. And that, being raised from the dead, He was to ascend into heaven, (Ps. lxviii 17) David says thus: "The chariot of God (is) ten-thousandfold, thousands are the drivers: [263] the Lord (is) among then in Sinai in (his) sanctuary." location 1821
 Irenaeus Proof of the Apostolic Preaching,83

{Ps 68:18}
"He ascended up on high, he led captivity captive: he received, he gave gifts to men." And by captivity he means the destruction of the rule of the apostate angels. [264] He declares also the place where He was to ascend into heaven from the earth. For the Lord, he says, from Sion ascended up on high. [265] For over against Jerusalem, on the mount which is called (the Mount) of Olives, after He was risen from the dead, He assembled His disciples, and expounded to them the things concerning the kingdom of heaven; and they saw that He ascended, and they saw how the heavens were opened and received Him. location 1824
Irenaeus Proof of the Apostolic Preaching 

{Ps 24:7}
84. And the same says David again: "Lift up your gates, ye rulers; and be ye lift up, ye everlasting gates, and the King of glory shall come in." For the everlasting gates are the heavens. But because the Word descended invisible to created things, He was not made known in His descent to them. location 1829
 Irenaeus Proof of the Apostolic Preaching,84

{Eph 2:20}
our faith in Him was well-founded, and the tradition of the preaching (is) true: that is to say, the testimony of the apostles, who being sent forth by the Lord preached in all the world the Son of God, location 1846 
Irenaeus Proof of the Apostolic Preaching

{Rom 5:1}
that by the putting away of the enmity towards God, which is unrighteousness, we should obtain peace with Him, doing that which is pleasing to Him. location 1848 
Irenaeus Proof of the Apostolic Preaching

{Rom 10:15; Isa 52:7}
"How beautiful are the feet of them that bring tidings of peace, and of them that bring tidings of good things." [268] (Isa. lii. 7) location 1850 
Irenaeus Proof of the Apostolic Preaching

{Isa 2:3; Ps 19:4}
Isaiah says thus: "For from Sion shall come forth the law, and the word of the Lord from Jerusalem." And that in all the earth they were to preach, David says: "Into all the earth went forth their speech, and their words to the ends of the world." location 1852 
Irenaeus Proof of the Apostolic Preaching

{Rom 9:28: Rom 13:10; Isa 10:22-23}
And that not by the much speaking of the Law, but by the brevity of faith and love, men were to be saved, Isaiah says thus: "A word brief and short in righteousness: for a short word will God make in the whole world." (Cf. Isa. x. 23) And therefore the apostle Paul says: "Love is the fulfilling of the Law." location 1857
Irenaeus Proof of the Apostolic Preaching

{Isa 65:15-16}
And that in the end by His name they should be saved who served God, Isaiah says: "And on those who serve me a new name shall be called, which shall be blessed upon the earth: and they shall bless the true God." And that this blessing He Himself should bring about, and Himself should redeem us by His own blood, Isaiah declared, saying: "*No mediator, no angel, but the Lord himself saved them; because he loved them and spared them: he himself redeemed them." [272] location 1871
* I could not find this verse!
Irenaeus Proof of the Apostolic Preaching

{Mt 5:17; Rom 10:4; Isa 43:18-21}
89. That He would not send back the redeemed to the legislation of Moses--for the Law was fulfilled in Christ--but would have them live [273] in newness by the Word, through faith in the Son of God and love, Isaiah declared, saying: "Remember not the former things, nor bring to mind the things that were in the beginning. Behold I make new (things), which shall now spring up, and ye shall know (them). And I will make in the wilderness a way, and in the waterless place streams, to give drink to my chosen race, and to my people whom I have purchased to declare my virtues." [274] Now a wilderness and a waterless place was at first the calling of the Gentiles: for the Word had not passed through them, [275] nor given them the Holy Spirit to drink; [276] who fashioned the new way of godliness and righteousness, and made copious streams to spring forth, disseminating over the earth the Holy Spirit; location 1877 
Irenaeus Proof of the Apostolic Preaching,89

{Heb 8:8-12; Jer 31:31-34}
90. Therefore by newness of the spirit is our calling, and not in the oldness of the letter; [277] even as Jeremiah prophesied: "Behold the days come, saith the Lord, that I will accomplish for the house of Israel and for the house of Judah the covenant: of the testament [278] which I covenanted with their fathers, in the day when I took them by the hand to lead them out of the land of Egypt: because they continued not in the covenant, and I regarded them not, saith the Lord. For this is the covenant of the testament that I will covenant with the house of Israel after those days, saith the Lord: I will put my laws [279] into their minds, and write them in their hearts; and I will be to them a God, and they shall be to me a people: and they shall not teach any more every man his neighbor, and every man his brother, saying, Know the Lord: for all shall know me, from the least to the greatest of them. For I will pardon and be merciful unto the sins of their iniquities, and their sins will I remember no more."
Irenaeus Proof of the Apostolic Preaching,90

{Isa 17:7-8}
 91. And that these promises the calling from among the Gentiles should inherit, to whom also the new testament was opened up, [280] Isaiah says thus: "These things saith the God of Israel: In that day a man shall trust [281] in his Maker, and his eyes shall look to the Holy One of Israel: and they shall not trust in altars, nor in the work of their own hands, which their fingers have made." For very plainly this was said of such as have forsaken idols and believed in God our Maker through the Holy One of Israel. And the Holy One of Israel is Christ: and He became visible to men, and to Him we look eagerly and behold Him; and we trust not in altars, nor in the location 1886
Irenaeus Proof of the Apostolic Preaching,91 

{Isa 65:1; Rom 10:20}
92. And that He should become visible [282] among us--for the Son of God became Son of man--and be found of us who before had no knowledge (of Him), the Word Himself says thus in Isaiah: "I became manifest to them that sought me not; I was found of them that asked not for me. I said, Behold, here am I, to a race that called not on my name." location 1902 
Irenaeus Proof of the Apostolic Preaching,92

{Mt 3:9; Ezek 36:26-27}
This also is that which was said by John the Baptist: "That God is able of these stones to raise up sons to Abraham." For our hearts being withdrawn and taken away from the stony worship [284] by means of faith behold God, and become sons of Abraham, who was justified by faith. And therefore God says by Ezekiel the prophet: "And I will give them another heart, and a new spirit will I give them: and I will withdraw and take away the stony heart from their flesh, and I will give them another heart of flesh: so that they shall walk in my precepts, and shall keep my ordinances and do them." location 1909 
Irenaeus Proof of the Apostolic Preaching

{Isa 54:1}
because no longer Moses (as) mediator nor Elijah (as) messenger, [285] but the Lord Himself has redeemed us, granting many more children to the Church than to the first Synagogue; [286] as Isaiah declared, saying: "Rejoice thou barren, that didst not bear. The barren is the Church, which never at all in former times presented sons to God." location 1919 
Irenaeus Proof of the Apostolic Preaching

{Isa 54:1}
"for the children of the desolate are more than of her which hath an husband." Now the first Synagogue had as husband the Law. location 1924 
Irenaeus Proof of the Apostolic Preaching

{Deut 32:21; Rom 10:19}
Deuteronomy says that the Gentiles should be the head, and the unbelieving people the tail. And again he says: "Ye provoked me to jealousy with those that are no gods, and angered me with your idols: and I will provoke you to jealousy with that which is no nation, and with a foolish nation will I anger you." (Cf. Rom. x. 19) Because they forsook the God who is, and worshipped and served the gods who are not; and they slew the prophets of God, and prophesied for Baal, who was the idol of the Canaanites. And the Son of God, who is, [287] they despised and condemned, but they chose Barabbas the robber who had been taken for murder: and the eternal King [288] they disavowed, and they acknowledged as their king the temporal Caesar. (So) it pleased God to grant their inheritance to the foolish Gentiles, location 1926 
Irenaeus Proof of the Apostolic Preaching

{Mt 23:37-39; Rom 8:10; Gal 3:23-25; Mt 5:17-48; Mt 6:1-34}
God has summed up again for Himself in us the faith of Abraham, we ought not to turn back any more--I mean, to the first Legislation. For we have received the Lord of the Law, the Son of God; and by faith in Him we learn to love God with all our heart, and our neighbor as ourselves. Now the love of God is far from all sin, [289] and love to the neighbor works no ill to the neighbor. (Cf. Rom xiii. 10) Wherefore also we need not the Law as a tutor. Behold, with the Father we speak, and in His presence we stand, being children in malice, [290] and grown strong in all righteousness and soberness. For no longer shall the Law say, "Do not commit adultery," to him who has no desire at all for another's wife; and "Thou shalt not kill," to him who has put away from himself all anger and enmity; (and) "Thou shalt not covet thy neighbor's field or ox or ass," to those who have no care at all for earthly things, but store up the heavenly fruits: nor "An eye for an eye, and a tooth for a tooth," to him who counts no man his enemy, but all men his neighbors, and therefore cannot stretch out his hand at all for vengeance. location 1934
Irenaeus Proof of the Apostolic Preaching 

{Lk 14:33; Mt 19:29; Lk 18:29-30; Ex 20:8; Hos 6:6}
It will not require tithes of him who consecrates all his possessions to God, [291] leaving father and mother and all his kindred, and following the Word of God. And there will be no command to remain idle for one day of rest, to him who perpetually keeps sabbath, [292] that is to say, who in the temple of God, which is man's body, does service to God, and in every hour works righteousness. "For I desire mercy, He saith, and not sacrifice; and the knowledge of God more than burnt offerings." location 1946 
Irenaeus Proof of the Apostolic Preaching

{Rom 10:13; Joel 2:32; Acts 2:21}
"But whosoever shall call on the name of the Lord shall be saved." And there is none other name of the Lord given under heaven whereby men are saved, save that of God, which is Jesus Christ the Son of God, location 1953
Irenaeus Proof of the Apostolic Preaching 

{1 Jn 5:14; Jn 15:7}
97. By the invocation of the name of Jesus Christ, crucified under Pontius Pilate, [293] there is a separation and division among mankind; and wherever any of those who believe on Him shall invoke and call upon Him and do His will, He is near and present, fulfilling the requests of those who with pure hearts call upon Him. location 1956
Irenaeus Proof of the Apostolic Preaching,97 

{Bar 3:36}
This is our God: there shall none other be accounted of in comparison with him. "He hath found out every way by knowledge, and hath given it unto Jacob his servant, and to Israel that is beloved of him." location 1967 
Irenaeus Proof of the Apostolic Preaching

{Eph 2:11-13}
Now by Jacob and Israel he means the Son of God, who received power from the Father over our life, and after having received this brought it down to us who were far off from Him, God. [299]  location 1970
Irenaeus Proof of the Apostolic Preaching 

{Eph 2:20}
This, beloved, is the preaching of the truth, and this is the manner of our redemption, and this is the way of life, which the prophets proclaimed, and Christ established, and the apostles delivered, and the Church in all the world hands on to her children. [300] This must we keep with all certainty, with a sound will and pleasing to God, with good works and right-willed disposition.  location 1973
Irenaeus Proof of the Apostolic Preaching

{Isa 1:30}
and such also are reckoned among those who are lacking in faith. And others receive not the gifts of the Holy Spirit, and cast away from themselves the prophetic grace, [301] watered whereby man bears the fruit of life unto God: and these are they of whom Isaiah speaks: "For they shall be," saith he, "as an oak that is stripped of leaves, and as a garden that hath no water." And such are in no wise serviceable to God, seeing that they cannot bear any fruit. location 1982 
Irenaeus Proof of the Apostolic Preaching

{1 Jn 4:3; 2 Jn 7; Jude 19; 1 Jn 2:22-23}
100. So then in respect of the three points [302] of our seal [i.e., baptism], error has strayed widely from the truth. For either they reject the Father, or they accept not the Son and speak against the dispensation of His incarnation; or else they receive not the Spirit, that is, they reject prophecy. And of all such must we beware, location 1987 
Irenaeus Proof of the Apostolic Preaching,100

{1 Cor 8:1; Mt 15:11}
8:1: Now concerning things sacrificed to idols: we know that we all have knowledge. Knowledge puffs up, but love edifies. 
What then is it of which he was then accusing the Corinthians? A heavy charge and the cause of many evils. Well, what is it? Many among them, having learnt that (Matthew 15:11.) "not the things which enter in defile the man, but the things which proceed out," and that idols of wood and stone, and demons, have no power to hurt or help, had made an immoderate use of their perfect knowledge of this to the harm both of others and of themselves. They had both gone in where idols were and had partaken of the tables there, and were producing thereby great and ruinous evil. For, on the one hand, those who still retained the fear of idols and knew not how to contemn them, took part in those meals, because they saw the more perfect sort doing this; and hence they got the great injury: since they did not touch what was set before them with the same mind as the others, but as things offered in sacrifice to idols; and the thing was becoming a way to idolatry. On the other hand, these very persons who pretended to be more perfect were injured in no common way, partaking in the tables of demons. 
John Chrysostom, Homily 20 on 1 Corinthians, Sec. 1.

{1 Cor 8:1}
Now this blessed man being about to correct it, did not immediately begin to speak vehemently; for that which was done came more of folly than of wickedness: wherefore in the first instance there was need rather of exhortation than of severe rebuke and wrath. ...
"Now concerning things sacrificed to idols, we know that we all have knowledge." Leaving alone the weak, which he always does, he discourses with the strong first. ... And first he makes void their conceit by declaring that this very thing which they considered as peculiar to themselves, the having perfect knowledge, was common to all. Thus, "we know," says he, "that we all have knowledge." ... For what was done was of knowledge, and perfect knowledge. Nor was it safe to overthrow it, and yet in no other way was it possible to cast out the conceit which had resulted from it. What then does he? First, by signifying that it was common, he curbs that swelling pride of theirs. For they who possess something great and excellent are more elated, when they alone have it; but if it be made out that they possess it in common with others, they no longer have so much of this feeling. First then he makes it common property, because they considered it to belong to themselves alone. 
John Chrysostom, Homily 20 on 1 Corinthians, Sec. 1.

{1 Cor 8:1-2}
[2.] The next has greater force. What then is this? In that he shows that not even this thing itself was in all points complete, but imperfect, and extremely so. And not only imperfect, but also injurious, unless there were another thing joined together with it. For having said that" we have knowledge," he added, "Knowledge puffs up, but love edifies:" so that when it is without love, it lifts men up to absolute arrogance. 
... It seems then that knowledge is not productive of love, but on the contrary debars from it him that is not on his guard, puffing him up and elating him. For arrogance is wont to cause divisions: but love both draws together and leads to knowledge. 
John Chrysostom, Homily 20 on 1 Corinthians, Sec. 2.

{1 Cor 8:1-3}
Ver. 3: "But if any man loves God, the same is known of Him." 
So that "I forbid not this," says he, "namely, your having perfect knowledge; but your having it with love, that I enjoin; else is it no gain, but rather loss." 
Do you see how he already sounds the first note of his discourse concerning love? For since all these evils were springing from the following root, i.e.., not from perfect knowledge, but from their not greatly loving nor sparing their neighbors; ... For although you may know something more than your neighbor, if you love him you will not set yourself up but lead him also to the same." Wherefore also having said, "Knowledge puffs up," he added, "but love edifies." He did not say, "Behaves itself modestly," but what is much more, and more gainful. For their knowledge was not only puffing them up but also distracting them. On this account he opposes the one to the other. 
John Chrysostom, Homily 20 on 1 Corinthians, Sec. 2.

{1 Cor 8:2}
[3.] And then he adds a third consideration, which was of force to set them down. What then is this? that although charity be joined with it, yet not even in that case is this our knowledge perfect. 
...
Verse 2. "But if any man think that he knows anything, he knows nothing yet as he ought to know." 
This is a mortal blow. ... Now if we possess as yet exact knowledge of nothing, how is it that some have rushed on to such a pitch of frenzy as to say that they know God with all exactness? ... And mark how he pulls down their swelling pride: for he said not, "of the matters before us you have not the proper knowledge," but, "about everything." And he did not say, "you," but, "no one whatever," be it Peter, be it Paul, be it anyone else. For by this he both soothed them and carefully kept them under. 
John Chrysostom, Homily 20 on 1 Corinthians, Sec. 3.

{1 Cor 8:3}
Verse 3. "But if any man loves God, the same is known of Him." 
He does not say, "knows Him," but, "is known of Him." For we have not known Him, but He has known us. And therefore did Christ say, "You have not chosen Me, but I have chosen you." And Paul elsewhere, "Then shall I know fully, even as also I have been known." Observe now, I pray, by what means he brings down their high-mindedness. ... In addition to this, that they have not even this from themselves, but by gift from God. For he said not, "has known God," but, "is known of Him." Again, that this very thing comes of love which they have not as they ought. For, "if any man," says he, "love God, the same is known of Him." 
John Chrysostom, Homily 20 on 1 Corinthians, Sec. 3.

{1 Cor 8:4}
[4.] Verse 4. "Concerning therefore the eating of things sacrificed to idols, we know that no idol is anything in the world, and that there is no God but one." 
Look what a strait he has fallen into! For indeed his mind is to prove both; that one ought to abstain from this kind of banquet, and that it has no power to hurt those who partake of it: things which were not greatly in agreement with each other. For when they were told that they had no harm, in them, they would naturally run to them as indifferent things. But when forbidden to touch them, they would suspect, on the contrary, that their having power to do hurt occasioned the prohibition. Wherefore, you see, he puts down their opinion about idols, and then states as a first reason for their abstaining the stumbling blocks which they place in the way of their brethren; in these words: "Now concerning the eating of things sacrificed to idols, we know that no idol is anything in the world." Again he makes it common property and does not allow this to be theirs alone, but extends the knowledge all over the world. For "not among you alone," says he, "but everywhere on earth this doctrine prevails." What then is it? "That no idol is anything in the world; that there is no God but one." What then? are there no idols? no statues? Indeed there are; but they have no power: neither are they gods, but stones and demons. 
John Chrysostom, Homily 20 on 1 Corinthians, Sec. 4.

{1 Cor 8:5}
[5.] Verse 5. "For though there be that are called gods, whether in heaven or on earth, as there are gods many and lords many; yet to us there is one God, the Father, of Whom are all things, and we to Him; and one Lord Jesus Christ, through Whom are all things, and we through Him." 
Since he had said, that "an idol is nothing" and that "there is no other God;" and yet there were idols and there were those that were called gods; that he might not seem to be contradicting plain facts, he goes on to say, "For though there be that are called gods, as indeed there are;" not absolutely, "there are;" but, "called," not in reality having this but in name: "be it in heaven or on earth: - in heaven," meaning the sun and the moon and the remainder of the choir of stars; for these too the Greeks worshipped: but upon the earth demons, and all those who had been made gods of men: - "yet to us there is One God, the Father." In the first instance having expressed it without the word "Father," and said, "there is no God but one," he now adds this also, when he had utterly cast out the others. 
Next, he adduces what indeed is the great token of divinity; "of Whom are all things." 
John Chrysostom, Homily 20 on 1 Corinthians, Sec. 5.

{1 Cor 8:7}
[7]  Verse 7. "But not in all is knowledge." 
What knowledge does he mean? About God, or about things offered in sacrifice to idols? 
John Chrysostom, Homily 20 on 1 Corinthians, Sec. 7.

{1 Cor 8:7}
[8.] "But some being used to the idol eat as of a thing sacrificed to an idol, and their conscience being weak is defiled." 
They still tremble at idols, he says. ... For their sake also he employs some reserve, saying, "But some with conscience of the things sacrificed to an idol. ... not yet being able to despise and once for all laugh them to scorn, but still in some doubt. Just as if a man were to think that by touching a dead body he should pollute himself according to the Jewish custom, and then seeing others touching it with a clear conscience, but not with the same mind touching it himself, would be polluted. This was their state of feeling at that time. 
"And their conscience being weak is defiled." Nowhere as yet does he state his argument about the nature of the thing, but turns himself this way and that as concerning the conscience of the person partaking. For he was afraid lest in his wish to correct the weak person, he should inflict a heavy blow upon the strong one, and make him also weak. On which account he spares the one no less than the other. Nor does he allow the thing itself to be thought of any consequence, but makes his argument very full to prevent any suspicion of the kind. 
John Chrysostom, Homily 20 on 1 Corinthians, Sec. 8.

{1 Cor 8:8}
[9.] Verse 8. "But food does not commend us to God. For neither if we eat are we the better, nor if we eat not are we the worse." 
What then is this? That although no one were injured nor any perversion of another ensued, not even in this case were it right so to do. For the former topic by itself is laboring in vain. Since he that hears of another being hurt while himself has the gain, is not very apt to abstain; but then rather he does so, when he finds out that he himself is no way advantaged by the thing. Wherefore he sets this down first, saying, "But food commends us not to God." See how cheap he holds that which was accounted to spring from perfect knowledge! "For neither if we eat are we the better," (that is, stand higher in God's estimation, as if we had done anything good or great:) "nor if we eat not are we the worse," that is, fall in anyway short of others. But as he goes on, he discloses all the harm which was likely to arise from the matter. 
John Chrysostom, Homily 20 on 1 Corinthians, Sec. 9.

{1 Cor 8:9}
[10.] Verse 9. "For take heed," says he, "lest by any means this liberty of yours become a stumbling-block to the weak among the brethren." 
And he said not, "This your knowledge," which would have sounded more like praise; nor "this your perfectness;" but, "your liberty;" a thing which seemed to savor more of rashness and obstinacy and arrogance. ... For let it be so that you correct them not, nor arouse them: yet why trip them up, and make them to stumble, when you ought to stretch out the hand? but for that you have no mind: well then, at least avoid casting them down. 
John Chrysostom, Homily 20 on 1 Corinthians, Sec. 10.

{1 Cor 8:10}
Verse 10. "For if a man see you who hast knowledge, sitting at food in an idol's temple, will not his conscience if he is weak, be emboldened to eat things sacrificed to idols?" 
After having said, "Take heed lest this your liberty become a stumbling-block," he explains how and in what manner it becomes so: and he continually employs the term "weakness," that the mischief may not be thought to arise from the nature of the thing, nor demons appear formidable. 
John Chrysostom, Homily 20 on 1 Corinthians, Sec. 10.

{1 Cor 8:11}
Verse 11. "And through your food he that is weak perish, the brother for whose sake Christ died." 
For there are two things which deprive you of excuse in this mischief; one, that he is weak, the other, that he is your brother: rather, I should say, there is a third also, and one more terrible than all. What then is this? That whereas Christ refused not even to die for him, you cannot bear even to accommodate yourself to him. 
John Chrysostom, Homily 20 on 1 Corinthians, Sec. 10.

{1 Cor 8:12}
Verse 12. "And thus sinning against the brethren, and wounding their weak conscience, you sin against Christ." 
Do you observe how quietly and gradually he has brought their offense up to the very summit of iniquity? And again, he makes mention of the infirmity of the other sort: and so, the very thing which these considered to make for them, that he everywhere turns round upon their own head. And he said not, "Putting stumbling-blocks in their way," but, "wounding;" so as by the force of his expression to indicate their cruelty. For what can be more savage than a man who wounds the sick?
John Chrysostom, Homily 20 on 1 Corinthians, Sec. 10.
.
 {1 Cor 8:13}
[11.] Verse 13. "Wherefore, if food make my brother to stumble, I will eat no flesh forever." 
This is like the best of teachers, to teach in his own person the things which he speaks. Nor did he say whether justly or unjustly; but in any case. "I say not," (such is his tone,) "food offered in sacrifice to an idol, which is already prohibited for another reason; but if any even of those things which are within license and are permitted causes stumbling, from these also will I abstain: and not one or two days, but all the time of my life." For he says, "I will eat no flesh forever." And he said not, "Lest I destroy my brother," but simply, "That I make not my brother to stumble." ...
Now these things might be seasonably spoken not to them only, but also to us, apt as we are to esteem lightly the salvation of our neighbors and to utter those satanical words. I say, satanical: for the expression, "What care I, though such a one stumble, and such another perish?" savors of his cruelty and inhuman mind. ...
John Chrysostom, Homily 20 on 1 Corinthians, Sec. 11.

{1 Cor 8:13; Acts 20:34}
Whenever then you see one driving nails, smiting with a hammer, covered with soot, do not therefore hold him cheap, but rather for that reason admire him. Since even Peter girded himself, and handled the dragnet, and went a fishing after the Resurrection of the Lord. 
And why say I Peter? For this same Paul himself, after his incessant running to and fro and all those vast miracles, standing in a tent-maker's shop, sewed hides together: while angels were reverencing him and demons trembling. And he was not ashamed to say, (Acts 20:34.) "To my necessities, and to those who were with me, these hands ministered." What say I, that he was not ashamed? Yea, he gloried in this very thing. 
John Chrysostom, Homily 20 on 1 Corinthians, Sec. 11.

{1 Cor 7:1-2}
"Now concerning the things whereof you wrote to me: it is good for a man not to touch a woman. But because of fornications, let each man have his own wife; and let each woman have her own husband." 
HAVING corrected the three heaviest things laid to their charge, one, the distraction of the Church, another, about the fornicator, a third, about the covetous person, he thenceforth uses a milder sort of speech. And he interposes some exhortation and advice about marriage and virginity, giving the hearers some respite from more unpleasant subjects. ... Wherefore he says, "Now concerning the things whereof you wrote to me." For they had written to him, "Whether it was right to abstain from one's wife, or not:" and writing back in answer to this and giving rules about marriage, he introduces also the discourse concerning virginity: "It is good for a man not to touch a woman." "For if," says he, "you inquire what is the excellent and greatly superior course, it is better not to have any connection whatever with a woman: but if you ask what is safe and helpful to your own infirmity, be connected by marriage." 
John Chrysostom, Homily 19 on 1 Corinthians, Sec. 1.

{1 Cor 7:1-2}
But since it was likely, as also happens now, that the husband might be willing but the wife not, or perhaps the reverse, mark how he discusses each case. Some indeed say that this discourse was addressed by him to elders. But I, judging from what follows, could not affirm that it was so: since he would not have given his advice in general terms. For if he were writing these things only for the elders, he would have said, "It is good for the teacher not to touch a woman." But now he has made it of universal application, saying, "It is good for a man;" not for elder only. ...  And in saying, "Because of fornications, let every man have his own wife" by the very cause alleged for the concession he guides men to continence. 
John Chrysostom, Homily 19 on 1 Corinthians, Sec. 1.

{1 Cor 7:3; Gen 3:16; Eph 5:25; Eph 5:33}
[2.] Verse 3. "Let the husband pay the wife the honor due to her: in like manner the wife the husband." 
Now what is the meaning of "the due honor? The wife has not power over her own body;" but is both the slave and the mistress of the husband. And if you decline the service which is due, you have offended God. But if you wish to withdraw yourself, it must be with the husband's permission, though it be but for a short time. For this is why he calls the matter a debt, to show that no one is master of himself but that they are servants to each other. 
When therefore you see a harlot tempting you, say, "My body is not mine, but my wife's." The same also let the woman say to those who would undermine her chastity, "My body is not mine, but my husband's." Now if neither husband nor wife has power even over their own body, much less have they over their property. Hear you, all that have husbands and all that have wives: that if you must not count your body your own, much less your money. 
Elsewhere I grant He gives to the husband abundant precedence, both in the New Testament, and the Old saying, (Genesis 3:16.) "Your turning shall be towards your husband, and he shall rule over you." Paul does so too by making a distinction thus, and writing, (Ephesians 5:25, 33.) "Husbands, love your wives; and let the wife see that she reverence her husband." But in this place we hear no more of greater and less, but it is one and the same right. Now why is this? Because his speech was about chastity. "In all other things," says he, "let the husband have the prerogative; but not so where the question is about chastity." "The husband has no power over his own body, neither the wife." There is great equality of honor, and no prerogative. 
John Chrysostom, Homily 19 on 1 Corinthians, Sec. 2.

{1 Cor 7:5}
[3.] Verse 5. "Defraud you not one the other, except it be by consent." 
What then can this mean? "Let not the wife," says he, "exercise continence, if the husband be unwilling; nor yet the husband without the wife's consent." Why so? Because great evils spring from this sort of continence. For adulteries and fornications and the ruin of families have often arisen from hence. For if when men have their own wives they commit fornication, much more if you defraud them of this consolation. And well says he, "Defraud not; fraud" here, and "debt" above, that he might show the strictness of the right of dominion in question. For that one should practice continence against the will of the other is "defrauding;" but not so, with the other's consent: any more than I count myself defrauded, if after persuading me you take away anything of mine. Since only he defrauds who takes against another's will and by force-a thing which many women do, working sin rather than righteousness, and thereby becoming accountable for the husband's uncleanness, and rending all asunder. Whereas they should value concord above all things, since this is more important than all beside. 
...
We will, if you please, consider it with a view to actual cases. Thus, suppose a wife and husband, and let the wife be continent, without consent of her husband; well then, if hereupon he commit fornication, or though abstaining from fornication fret and grow restless and be heated and quarrel and give all kind of trouble to his wife; where is all the gain of the fasting and the continence, a breach being made in love? There is none. ...
John Chrysostom, Homily 19 on 1 Corinthians, Sec. 3.

{1 Cor 7:5}
 "Defraud not one another, unless it be by consent for a season, that you may give yourselves to prayer." It is prayer with unusual earnestness which he here means. For if he is forbidding those who have intercourse with one another to pray, how could "pray without ceasing" have any place? It is possible then to live with a wife and yet give heed to prayer. But by continence prayer is made more perfect. For he did not say merely, "That you may pray;" but, "That you may give yourselves to it;" as though what he speaks of might cause not uncleanness but much occupation.
 John Chrysostom, Homily 19 on 1 Corinthians, Sec. 3.

{1 Cor 7:5}
"And may be together again, that Satan tempt you not." Thus lest it should seem to be a matter of express enactment, he adds the reason. And what is it? "That Satan tempt you not." And that you may understand that it is not the devil only who causes this crime, I mean adultery, he adds, "because of your incontinency." 
John Chrysostom, Homily 19 on 1 Corinthians, Sec. 3.

{1 Cor 7:6}
"But this I say by way of permission, not of commandment. For I would that all men were even as I myself; That is, in a state of continence. This he does in many places when he is advising about difficult matters; he brings forward himself, and says, "Be you imitators of me." 
John Chrysostom, Homily 19 on 1 Corinthians, Sec. 3.

{1 Cor 7:7-9}
"Howbeit each man has his own gift from God, one after this manner, and another after that." 
Thus since he had heavily charged them saying, "for your incontinence," he again comforts them by the words, "each one has his own gift of God;" not declaring that towards that virtue there is no need of zeal on our part, but, as I was saying before, to comfort them. For if it be a "gift," and man contributes nothing thereunto, how say you, "But (v. 8.) I say to the unmarried and to widows, it is good for them if they abide even as I (v. 9.) but if they have not continency let them marry?" Do you see the strong sense of Paul how he both signifies that continence is better, and yet puts no force on the person who cannot attain to it; fearing lest some offense arise? 
John Chrysostom, Homily 19 on 1 Corinthians, Sec. 3.

{1 Cor 7:9}
"For it is better to marry than to burn." 
He indicates how great is the tyranny of concupiscence. What he means is something like this: "If you have to endure much violence and burning desire, withdraw yourself from your pains and toils, lest haply you be subverted." 
John Chrysostom, Homily 19 on 1 Corinthians, Sec. 3.

{1 Cor 7:10-11; Mt 5:32; Mt 19:9; Mk 10:11; Lk 16:18}
[4.] Verse 10. "But to the married I give charge, yet not I, but the Lord." 
Because it is a law expressly appointed by Christ which he is about to read to them about the "not putting away a wife without fornication; (Matthew 5:32; 19:9; Mark 10:11; Luke 16:18.) therefore he says, "Not I." True it is what was before spoken though it were not expressly stated, yet it also is His decree. But this, you see, He had delivered in express words. So that the words "I and not I" have this difference of meaning. For that you might not imagine even his own words to be human, therefore he added, "For I think that I also have the Spirit of God." Now what is that which "to the married the Lord commanded?" That the wife depart not from her husband: (v. 11.) but if she depart, let her remain unmarried, or be reconciled to her husband." Here, seeing that both on the score of continence and other pretexts, and because of infirmities of temper, it fell out that separations took place: it were better, he says, that such things should not be at all; but however if they take place, let the wife remain with her husband, if not to cohabit with him, yet so as not to introduce any other to be her husband. 
John Chrysostom, Homily 19 on 1 Corinthians, Sec. 4.

{1 Cor 7:12; Mt 5:24}
Verse 12. "But to the rest speak I, not the Lord. If any brother have a wife that believes not, and she is content to dwell with him, let him not leave her. And if any woman has a husband that believes not, and he is content to dwell with her, let her not leave him." 
In this case he provides for the abundant easiness of the duty, saying, "If any wife have a husband, or husband a wife, that believes not, let him not leave her." What say you? "If he be an unbeliever, let him remain with the wife, but not if he be a fornicator? And yet fornication is a less sin than unbelief." I grant, fornication is a less sin: but God spares your infirmities extremely. And this is what He does about the sacrifice, saying, (Matthew 5:24.) "Leave the sacrifice, and be reconciled to your brother." This also in the case of the man who owed ten thousand talents. For him too He did not punish for owing him ten thousand talents, but for demanding back a hundred pence from his fellow-servant He took vengeance on him. 
John Chrysostom, Homily 19 on 1 Corinthians, Sec. 4.

{1 Cor 7:12}
Then lest the woman might fear, as though she became unclean because of intercourse with her husband, he says, "For the unbelieving husband is sanctified in the wife, and the unbelieving wife is sanctified in the husband." And yet, if "he that is joined to an harlot is one body," it is quite clear that the woman also who is joined to an idolater is one body. Well: it is one body; nevertheless she becomes not unclean, but the cleanness of the wife overcomes the uncleanness of the husband; and again, the cleanness of the believing husband overcomes the uncleanness of the unbelieving wife. 
John Chrysostom, Homily 19 on 1 Corinthians, Sec. 4.

{1 Cor 7:12; 1 Cor 6:16}
How then in this case is the uncleanness overcome, and therefore the intercourse allowed; while in the woman who prostitutes herself, the husband is not condemned in casting her out? Because here there is hope that the lost member may be saved through the marriage; but in the other case the marriage has already been dissolved; and there again both are corrupted; but here the fault is in one only of the two. I mean something like this: she that has been guilty of fornication is utterly abominable: if then "he that is joined to a harlot is one body," he also becomes abominable by having connection with an harlot; wherefore all the purity flits away. But in the case before us it is not so. But how? The idolater is unclean but the woman is not unclean. For if indeed she were a partner with him in that wherein he is unclean, I mean his impiety, she herself would also become unclean. But now the idolater is unclean in one way, and the wife holds communion with him in another wherein he is not unclean. For marriage and mixture of bodies is that wherein the communion consists. 
Again, there is a hope that this man may be reclaimed by his wife for she is made completely his own: but for the other it is not very easy. For how will she who dishonored him in former times and became another's and destroyed the rights of marriage, have power to reclaim him whom she had wronged; him, moreover, who still remains to her as an alien? 
Again in that case, after the fornication the husband is not a husband: but here, although the wife be an idolatress, the husband's rights are not destroyed. 
John Chrysostom, Homily 19 on 1 Corinthians, Sec. 4.

{1 Cor 7:13-14}
However, he does not simply recommend cohabitation with the unbeliever, but with the qualification that he wills it. Wherefore he said, "And he himself be content to dwell with her." For, tell me, what harm is there when the duties of piety remain unimpaired and there are good hopes about the unbeliever, that those already joined should so abide and not bring in occasions of unnecessary warfare? For the question now is not about those who have never yet come together, but about those who are already joined. He did not say, If anyone wish to take an unbelieving wife, but, "If anyone has an unbelieving wife." Which means, If any after marrying or being married have received the word of godliness, and then the other party which had continued in unbelief still yearn for them to dwell together, let not the marriage be broken off. "For," says he, "the unbelieving husband is sanctified in the wife." So great is the superabundance of your purity. 
John Chrysostom, Homily 19 on 1 Corinthians, Sec. 4.

{1 Cor 7:14}
What then, is the Greek [i.e., unbeliever] holy? Certainly not: for he said not, He is holy; but, "He is sanctified in his wife." And this he said, not to signify that he is holy, but to deliver the woman as completely as possible from her fear and lead the man to desire the truth. For the uncleanness is not in the bodies wherein there is communion, but in the mind and the thoughts. And here follows the proof; namely, that if you continuing unclean have offspring, the child, not being of you alone, is of course unclean or half clean. But now it is not unclean. To which effect he adds, "else were your children unclean; but now are they holy;" that is, not unclean. But the Apostle calls them, "holy,"' by the intensity of the expression again casting out the dread arising from that sort of suspicion. 
John Chrysostom, Homily 19 on 1 Corinthians, Sec. 4.

{1 Cor 7:15}
Verse 15. "Yet if the unbelieving depart, let him depart," 
For in this case the matter is no longer that of fornication. But what is the meaning of, "if the unbelieving departs?" For instance, if he bid you sacrifice and take part in his ungodliness on account of your marriage, or else part company; it were better the marriage were annulled [?], and no breach made in godliness. Wherefore he adds, "A brother is not under bondage, nor yet a sister, in such cases." If day by day he buffet you and keep up combats on this account, it is better to separate. For this is what he glances at, saying, "But God has called us in peace." For it is the other party who furnished the ground of separation, even as he did who committed uncleanness. 
John Chrysostom, Homily 19 on 1 Corinthians, Sec. 4.

{1 Cor 7:16}
Verse 16. "For how know you, O wife, whether you shall save your husband?" 
This again refers to that expression, "let her not leave him." That is, "if he makes no disturbance, remain," says he, "for there is even profit in this; remain and advise and give counsel and persuade." For no teacher will have such power to prevail as a wife. And neither, on one hand, does he lay any necessity upon her and absolutely demand the point of her, that he may not again do what would be too painful. Nor, on the other, does he tell her to despair: but he leaves the matter in suspense through the uncertainty of the future, saying, "For how know you, O wife, whether you shall save your husband? or how know you, O husband whether you shall save your wife?" 
John Chrysostom, Homily 19 on 1 Corinthians, Sec. 4.

{1 Cor 7:17-21}
[5.] ver. 17. "Only as God has distributed to each man, as the Lord has called each, so let him walk. Was anyone called being circumcised? let him not become uncircumcised. Was any called in uncircumcision? let him not be circumcised. Circumcision is nothing, and uncircumcision is nothing; but the keeping of the commandments of God. Let each man abide in that calling wherein he was called. Were you called, being a slave? Care not for it." These things contribute nothing to faith, says he. Be not then contentious neither be troubled; for the faith has cast out all these things. 
"Let each man abide in that calling wherein he was called." Hast you been called, having an unbelieving wife? Continue to have her. Cast not out your wife for the faith's sake. Hast you been called, being a slave? Care not for it. Continue to be a slave. Hast you been called, being in uncircumcision? Remain uncircumcised. Being circumcised, did you become a believer? Continue circumcised. For this is the meaning of, "As God has distributed to each man." 
John Chrysostom, Homily 19 on 1 Corinthians, Sec. 5.

{1 Cor 7:21}
But even if you can become free, use it rather
Astonishing, where has he put slavery! As circumcision profits not: and uncircumcision does no harm; so neither does slavery, nor yet liberty. And that he might point out this with surpassing clearness, he says, "But even if you can become free, use it rather:" that is, rather continue a slave. Now upon what possible ground does he tell the person who might be set free to remain a slave? He means to point out that slavery is no harm but rather an advantage. Now we are not ignorant that some say, the words, "use it rather," are spoken with regard to liberty: interpreting it, "if you can become free, become free." But the expression would be very contrary to Paul's manner if he intended this. For he would not, when consoling the slave and signifying that he was in no respect injured, have told him to get free. Since perhaps someone might say, "What then, if I am not able? I am an injured and degraded person." This then is not what he says: but as I said, meaning to point out that a man gets nothing by being made free, he says, "Though you have it in your power to be made free, remain rather in slavery." Next he adds also the cause:
John Chrysostom, Homily 19 on 1 Corinthians, Sec. 5.

{1 Cor 7:22}
"For he that was called in the Lord being a bondservant, is the Lord's free man: likewise he that was called, being free, is Christ's bondservant." 
"For," says he, "in the things that relate to Christ, both are equal: and like as you are the slave of Christ, so also is your master. How then is the slave a free man? Because He has freed you not only from sin, but also from outward slavery while continuing a slave. For he suffers not the slave to be a slave, not even though he be a man abiding in slavery: and this is the great wonder. But how is the slave a free man while continuing a slave? When he is freed from passions and the diseases of the mind: when he looks down upon riches and wrath and all other the like passions. 
John Chrysostom, Homily 19 on 1 Corinthians, Sec. 5.

{1 Cor 7:23}
Verse 23. "You were bought with a price: become not bondservants of men." 
This saying is addressed not to slaves only but also to free men. For it is possible for one who is a slave not to be a slave; and for one who is a freeman to be a slave. "And how can one be a slave and not a slave?" When he dos all for God: when he feigns nothing, and dos nothing out of eye-service towards men: that is how one that is a slave to men can be free. Or again, how does one that is free become a slave? When he serves men in any evil service, either for gluttony or desire of wealth or for office' sake. For such a one, though he be free, is more of a slave than any man. 
And consider both these points. Joseph was a slave but not a slave to men: wherefore even in slavery he was freer than all that are free. For instance, he yielded not to his mistress; yielded not to the purposes which she who possessed him desired. Again she was free; yet none ever so like a slave, courting and beseeching her own servant. But she prevailed not on him, who was free, to do what he would not. This then was not slavery; but it was liberty of the most exalted kind. For what impediment to virtue had he from his slavery? 
John Chrysostom, Homily 19 on 1 Corinthians, Sec. 5.

{1 Cor 7:21-24}
[6.] Such a thing is Christianity; in slavery it bestows freedom. ... For this cause his bidding is, "remain a slave." But if it is impossible for one who is a slave to be a Christian such as he ought to be, the Greeks will condemn true religion to be of great weakness. However, if they can be taught that slavery in no way impairs godliness, they will admire our doctrine. For if death hurts us not, nor scourges, nor chains, much less slavery. Fire and iron and tyrannies innumerable and diseases and poverty and wild beasts and countless things more dreadful than these, have not been able to injure the faithful; nay, they have made them even mightier. And how shall slavery be able to hurt? It is not slavery itself, beloved, that hurts; but the real slavery is that of sin. 
John Chrysostom, Homily 19 on 1 Corinthians, Sec. 6.

{1 Cor 7:25}
[7.] Verse 25. "Now concerning virgins. I have no commandment of the Lord; but I give my judgment, as one that has obtained mercy of the Lord to be faithful." 
Advancing on his way in regular order, he proceeds next to speak concerning virginity. For after that he had exercised and trained them, in his words concerning continence, he goes forth towards what is greater, saying, "I have no commandment, but I esteem it to be good." 
John Chrysostom, Homily 19 on 1 Corinthians, Sec. 7.

{1 Cor 7:27}
Verse 27. "Are you bound to a wife? Seek not to be loosed. Are you loosed from a wife? Seek not a wife." 
Then, lest this should seem to be laying down a law, he subjoins, "but if you marry, you have not sinned." He next alleges the existing state of things, "the present distress, the shortness of the time," and "the affliction." For marriage draws along with it many things, which indeed he has glanced at, as well here as also in the discourse about continence: there, by saying, "the wife has not power over herself;" and here, by the expression, "You are bound." 
John Chrysostom, Homily 19 on 1 Corinthians, Sec. 7.

{1 Cor 7:28}
"But if and you marry, you have not sinned." 
He is not speaking about her who has made choice of virginity, for if it comes to that, she has sinned. Since if the widows are condemned for having to do with second marriages after they have once chosen widowhood, much more the virgins.
John Chrysostom, Homily 19 on 1 Corinthians, Sec. 7.
 
{1 Cor 7:28}
"But such shall have trouble in the flesh." 
"And pleasure too," you will say: but observe how he curtails this by the shortness of the time, saying, "the time is shortened;" that is, "we are exhorted to depart now and go forth, but you are running further in." And yet even although marriage had no troubles, even so we ought to press on towards things to come. But when it has affliction too, what need to draw on one's self an additional burden. What occasion to take up such a load, when even after taking it you must use it as having it not? For "those even that have wives must be as though they had none." 
John Chrysostom, Homily 19 on 1 Corinthians, Sec. 7.

{1 Cor 7:35}
Verse 35. "And this I say for your own profit, not that I may cast a snare upon you, but for that which is seemly, and that you may attend upon the Lord without distraction. 
Let the virgins hear that not by that one point is virginity defined; for she that is careful about the things of the world cannot be a virgin, nor seemly. Thus, when he said, "There is difference between a wife and a virgin," he added this as the difference: ... For the evil is not in the cohabitation, but in the impediment to the strictness of life. 
John Chrysostom, Homily 19 on 1 Corinthians, Sec. 7.

{1 Cor 7:36}
Verse 36. "But if any man think that he behaves himself unseemly toward his virgin." 
Here he seems to be talking about marriage; but all that he says relates to virginity; for he allows even a second marriage [after death], saying, "only in the Lord." Now what means, "in the Lord?" With chastity, with honor: for this is needed everywhere, and must be pursued; for else we cannot see God. 
John Chrysostom, Homily 19 on 1 Corinthians, Sec. 7.

{Typology; 1 Cor 10:1-5}
Chapter 10 Ver. 1-5: "For I would not, brethren, have you ignorant that our fathers were all under the cloud, and all passed through the sea; and were all baptized to Moses in the cloud and in the sea; and did all eat the same spiritual food; and did all drink the same spiritual drink; for they drank of a spiritual Rock that followed them: and the Rock was Christ. Howbeit with most of them God was not well pleased." 
And wherefore says he these things? To point out that as they [the Israelites] were nothing profited by the enjoyment of so great a gift, so neither these by obtaining Baptism and partaking of spiritual Mysteries, except they go on and show forth a life worthy of this grace. Wherefore also he introduces the types both of Baptism and of the Mysteries. 
But what is, "They were baptized into Moses?" Like as we, on our belief in Christ and His resurrection, are baptized, as being destined in our own persons to partake in the same mysteries; for, "we are baptized," says he, "for the dead," i.e., for our own bodies; even so they putting confidence in Moses, i.e., having seen him cross first, ventured also themselves into the waters. But because he wishes to bring the Type near the Truth; he speaks it not thus, but uses the terms of the Truth even concerning the Type. 
John Chrysostom, Homily 22 on 1 Corinthians, Sec. 3.

{Typology; 1 Cor 10:1-5}
Further: this was a symbol of the Font, and that which follows, of the Holy Table. For as you eat the Lord's Body, so they the manna: and as you drink the Blood, so they water from a rock. For though they were things of sense which were produced, yet were they spiritually exhibited, not according to the order of nature, but according to the gracious intention of the gift, and together with the body nourished also the soul, leading it to faith. 
John Chrysostom, Homily 22 on 1 Corinthians, Sec. 3.

{1 Cor 10:4}
"They drank the same spiritual drink for they drank of a spiritual Rock that followed them, and the Rock was Christ." 
For it was not the nature of the rock which sent forth the water, (such is his meaning,) else would it as well have gushed out before this time: but another sort of Rock, a spiritual One, performed the whole, even Christ who was everywhere with them and wrought all the wonders. For on this account he said, "that followed them." ... "For He who set those things before them," says he, "the same also has prepared this our Table: and the same Person both brought them through the sea and you through Baptism; and before them set manna, but before you His Body and Blood." 
John Chrysostom, Homily 22 on 1 Corinthians, Sec. 3.

{1 Cor 10:5}
[4.] Wherefore also he added, "Howbeit with most of them God was not well-pleased;" although He had honored them with so great honor. ... Their number profited them nothing: and these were all so many tokens of love; but not even did this profit them, inasmuch as they did not themselves show forth the fruits of love. Thus, since most men disbelieve the things said of hell, as not being present nor in sight; he alleges the things heretofore done as a proof that God does punish all who sin, even though He have bestowed innumerable benefits upon them: "for if you disbelieve the things to come," so he speaks, "yet surely the things that are past you will not disbelieve." 
John Chrysostom, Homily 22 on 1 Corinthians, Sec. 4.

{1 Cor 10:5}
Verse 5. "For they were overthrown," says he, "in the wilderness." 
Declaring by this word both the sweeping destruction, and the punishments and the vengeance inflicted by God, and that they did not so much as attain to the rewards proposed to them. ... And what are these things to us? say you. ... Wherefore also he adds, 
John Chrysostom, Homily 22 on 1 Corinthians, Sec. 4.

{1 Cor 10:6}
Verse 6. "Now these things were figures of us." 
For as the gifts are figures, even so are the punishments figures: and as Baptism and the Table were sketched out prophetically, so also by what ensued, the certainty of punishment coming on those who are unworthy of this gift was proclaimed beforehand for our sake that we by these examples might learn soberness. Wherefore also he adds, "To the intent we should not lust after evil things, as they also lusted." For as in the benefits the types went before and the substance followed, such shall be the order also in the punishments. See you how he signifies not only the fact that these shall be punished, but also the degree, more severely than those ancients? For if the one be type, and the other substance, it must needs be that the punishments should as far exceed as the gifts. And see whom he handles first: those who eat in the idol-temples. For having said, "that we should not lust after evil things," which was general, he subjoins that which is particular, implying that each of their sins arose from evil lusting. 
John Chrysostom, Homily 22 on 1 Corinthians, Sec. 4.

{1 Cor 10:7}
Verse 7. "Neither be you idolaters, as were some of them; as it is written, 'the people sat down to eat and to drink, and rose up to play.'" 
Do you hear how he even calls them "idolaters?" here indeed making the declaration, but afterwards bringing the proof. And he assigned the cause too wherefore they ran to those tables; and this was gluttony. Wherefore having said, "to the intent that we should not lust after evil things," and having added, nor "be idolaters," he names the cause of such transgression; and this was gluttony. "For the people sat down," says he, "to eat and to drink," and he adds the end thereof, "they rose up to play." "For even as they," says he, "from sensuality passed into idolatry; so there is a fear lest you also may fall from the one into the other." 
John Chrysostom, Homily 22 on 1 Corinthians, Sec. 4.

{1 Cor 10:8}
"Neither let us commit fornication, as some of them committed." 
Why does he here make mention of fornication? ... This then Paul also does here, at the same time both reminding them of that sin, and teaching that the parent of this evil also was luxury and gluttony. Wherefore also he adds, "Neither let us commit fornication, as some of them committed, and fell in one day three and twenty thousand." ... In the matter of Balaam, when they joined themselves to Baalpeor, the Midianite women appearing in the camp and alluring them to wantonness according to the counsel of Balaam. 
John Chrysostom, Homily 22 on 1 Corinthians, Sec. 4.

{1 Cor 10:9}
Verse 9. "Neither let us test Christ, as some of them also tested, and perished by serpents." 
By this he again hints at another charge which he likewise states at the end, blaming them because they contended about signs. And indeed they were destroyed on account of trials, saying, "when will the good things come? when the rewards?" 
John Chrysostom, Homily 22 on 1 Corinthians, Sec. 4.

{1 Cor 10:10}
Verse 10. "Neither murmur you, as some of them murmured, and perished by the destroyer." 
For what is required is not only to suffer for Christ, but also nobly to bear the things that come on us, and with all gladness: since this is the nature of every crown. ... Wherefore, both the Apostles when they were beaten rejoiced, and Paul gloried in his sufferings. 
John Chrysostom, Homily 22 on 1 Corinthians, Sec. 4.

{1 Cor 10:11}
[5.] Verse 11. "Now all these things happened to them by way of example; and they were written for our admonition, upon whom the ends of the ages are come." 
Again he terrifies them speaking of the "ends," and prepares them to expect things greater than had already taken place. "For that we shall suffer punishment is manifest," says he, "from what has been said, even to those who disbelieve the statements concerning hell-fire; but that the punishment also will be most severe, is evident, from the more numerous blessings which we have enjoyed, and from the things of which those were but figures. Since, if in the gifts one go beyond the other, it is most evident that so it will be in the punishment likewise." ... But when he said, "the ends of the ages," he means nothing else than that the fearful judgment is henceforth nigh at hand. 
John Chrysostom, Homily 22 on 1 Corinthians, Sec. 5.

{1 Cor 10:12}
Verse 12. "Wherefore let him that thinks he stands take heed lest he fall." 
For our standing here is not secure standing, no not until we be delivered out of the waves of this present life and have sailed into the tranquil haven. Be not therefore high-minded at your standing, but guard against your falling; for if Paul feared who was firmer than all, much more ought we to fear. 
John Chrysostom, Homily 22 on 1 Corinthians, Sec. 5.

{1 Cor 10:12; Ps 95:2[LXX]}
[7.] Considering therefore the greatness of His mercy, let us here make Him propitious to us, and "let us come before His face by a full confession," (Psalm 95:2. LXX.) that we may not depart hence without excuse, and have to endure the extreme punishment. For if in the present life we exhibit even an ordinary diligence, we shall gain the great rewards: but if we depart having become nothing better here, even though we repent ever so earnestly there it will do us no good. For it was our duty to strive while yet remaining within the lists, not after the assembly was broken up idly to lament and weep: as that rich man did, bewailing and deploring himself, but to no purpose and in vain, since he overlooked the time in which he ought to have done these things. 
John Chrysostom, Homily 22 on 1 Corinthians, Sec. 7.


{1 Cor 10:14}
[2.] Verse 14. "Wherefore, my brethren, flee from idolatry." 
Again he courts them by the name of kindred, and urges them to be rid of this sin with all speed. For he did not say, simply, depart, but "flee;" and he calls the matter "idolatry," and no longer bids them quit it merely on account of the injury to their neighbor, but signifies that the very thing of itself is sufficient to bring a great destruction. [referring to 1 Cor. 8]
John Chrysostom, Homily 24 on 1 Corinthians, Sec. 2.

{1 Cor 10:15}
Verse 15. "I speak as to wise men: judge you what I say." 
That he might not seem to exasperate them and to make his speech disgusting, in what follows he refers the decision to them, and sets his judges down on their tribunal with an encomium. "For I speak as to wise men," says he: which is the mark of one very confident of his own rights, that he should make the accused himself the judge of his allegations. 
Thus also he more elevates the hearer, when he discourses not as commanding nor as laying down the law, but as advising with them and as actually pleading before them. ... And he discourses as with friends, and says, "I need no other judges, do you yourselves pass this sentence upon me, I take you for arbiters." 
John Chrysostom, Homily 24 on 1 Corinthians, Sec. 2.

{1 Cor 10:16}
[3.] Verse 16. "The cup of blessing which we bless, is it not a communion of the Blood of Christ?" 
What say you, O blessed Paul? When you would appeal to the hearer's reverence, when you are making mention of awesome mysteries, do you give the title of "cup of blessing" to that fearful and most tremendous cup? "Yea," says he; "and no mean title is that which was spoken. For when I call it 'blessing,' I mean thanksgiving, and when I call it thanksgiving I unfold all the treasure of God's goodness, and call to mind those mighty gifts." ... "How then are not your doings inconsistent," says he, "O you Corinthians; blessing God for delivering you from idols, yet running again to their tables?" "The cup of blessing which we bless, is it not a communion of the Blood of Christ?". Very persuasively spoke he, and awfully. For what he says is this: "This which is in the cup is that which flowed from His side, and of that do we partake." But he called it a cup of blessing, because holding it in our hands, we so exalt Him in our hymn, wondering, astonished at His unspeakable gift, blessing Him, among other things, for the pouring out of this self-same draught that we might not abide in error: and not only for the pouring it out, but also for the imparting thereof to us all. 
John Chrysostom, Homily 24 on 1 Corinthians, Sec. 3.

{1 Cor 10:16}
[4.] "The bread which we break, is it not a communion of the Body of Christ?" 
Wherefore said he not, the participation? Because he intended to express something more and to point out how close was the union: in that we communicate not only by participating and partaking, but also by being united. For as that body is united to Christ, so also are we united to him by this bread. But why adds he also, "which we break?" For although in the Eucharist one may see this done, yet on the cross not so, but the very contrary. For, "A bone of Him," says one, "shall not be broken." But that which He suffered not on the cross, this He suffers in the oblation for your sake, and submits to be broken, that he may fill all men. Further, because he said, "a communion of the Body," and that which communicates is another thing from that whereof it communicates; even this which seems to be but a small difference, he took away. 
John Chrysostom, Homily 24 on 1 Corinthians, Sec. 4.

{1 Cor 10:17}
Verse 17. "For we, who are many, are one bread, one body." 
"For why speak I of communion?" says he, "we are that self-same body." For what is the bread? The Body of Christ. And what do they become who partake of it? The Body of Christ: not many bodies, but one body. For as the bread consisting of many grains is made one, so that the grains nowhere appear; they exist indeed, but their difference is not seen by reason of their conjunction; so are we conjoined both with each other and with Christ: there not being one body for you, and another for your neighbor to be nourished by, but the very same for all. Wherefore also he adds, "For we all partake of the one bread." Now if we are all nourished of the same and all become the same, why do we not also show forth the, same love, and become also in this respect one? 
John Chrysostom, Homily 24 on 1 Corinthians, Sec. 4.

{1 Cor 10:18}
[5.] Verse 18. "Behold Israel after the flesh: have not they which eat the sacrifices communion with the altar?" 
Again, from the old covenant he leads them to this point also. ... And what he says is of this nature: "even from persons of the grosset sort you may be instructed that they who eat the sacrifices, have communion with the altar." Do you see how he intimates that they who seemed to be perfect have not perfect knowledge, if they know not even this, that the result of these sacrifices to many oftentimes is a certain communion and friendship with devils, the practice drawing them on by degrees? For if among men the fellowship of salt and the table becomes an occasion and token of friendship, it is possible that this may happen also in the case of devils.
John Chrysostom, Homily 24 on 1 Corinthians, Sec. 5.

{1 Cor 10:18}
But do you, I pray, consider, how with regard to the Jews he said not, "they are partakers with God," but, "they have communion with the altar;" for what was placed thereon was burnt: but in respect to the Body of Christ, not so. But how? It is "a communion of the Lord's Body." For not with the altar, but with Christ Himself, do we have communion. 
But having said that they have "communion with the altar," afterwards fearing lest he should seem to discourse as if the idols had any power and could do some injury, see again how he overthrows them, saying, 
John Chrysostom, Homily 24 on 1 Corinthians, Sec. 5.

{1 Cor 10:19}
Verse 19. "What say I then? That an idol is anything? or that a thing sacrificed to idols is anything?" 
As if he had said, "Now these things I affirm, and try to withdraw you from the idols, not as though they could do any injury or had any power: for an idol is nothing; but I wish you to despise them." "And if you will have us despise them," says one, "wherefore do you carefully withdraw us from them?" Because they are not offered to your Lord. 
John Chrysostom, Homily 24 on 1 Corinthians, Sec. 5.

{1 Cor 10:20}
Verse 20. "For that which the Gentiles sacrifice," says he, "they sacrifice to demons, and not to God." 
Do not then run to the contrary things. For neither if you were a king's son, and having the privilege of your father's table, should leave it and choose to partake of the table of the condemned and the prisoners in the dungeon, would your father permit it, but with great vehemence he would withdraw you; not as though the table could harm you, but because it disgraces your nobility and the royal table. For verily these too are servants who have offended; dishonored, condemned, prisoners reserved for intolerable punishment, accountable for ten thousand crimes. How then are you not ashamed to imitate the gluttonous and vulgar crew, in that when these condemned persons set out a table, you run thither and partake of the viands? Here is the cause why I seek to withdraw you. For the intention of the sacrificers, and the person of the receivers, makes the things set before you unclean.
John Chrysostom, Homily 24 on 1 Corinthians, Sec. 5.

{1 Cor 10:20}
"And I would not that you should have communion with demons." 
Perceive you the kindness of a careful father? Perceive you also the very word, what force it has to express his feeling? "For it is my wish," says he, "that you have nothing in common with them." 
John Chrysostom, Homily 24 on 1 Corinthians, Sec. 5.

{1 Cor 10:21}
[6.] Next, because he brought in the saying by way of exhortation, lest any of the grosser sort should make light of it as having license, because he said, "I would not," and, "judge you;" he positively affirms in what follows and lays down the law, saying, 
Verse 21. "You cannot drink the cup of the Lord, and the cup of demons: you cannot partake of the Lord's table, and of the table of demons." 
John Chrysostom, Homily 24 on 1 Corinthians, Sec. 6.

{1 Cor 10:22; Deut 32:21}
Verse 22. "Do we provoke the Lord to jealousy? are we stronger than He?" 
That is, are we tempting Him, whether He is able to punish us, and irritating Him by going over to the adversaries and taking our stand with His enemies?" And this he said, reminding them of an ancient history and of their fathers' transgression. ... "For they," says He, "moved Me to jealousy with that which is not God; they provoked Me to anger with their idols." (Deuteronomy 32:21.) "Are we stronger than He?" Do you see how terribly, how awfully he rebukes them. 
John Chrysostom, Homily 24 on 1 Corinthians, Sec. 6.

{1 Cor 10:23-24; Rom 15:3}
Verse 23, 24. "All things are lawful for me, but all things are not beneficial: all things are lawful for me, but all things edify not. Let no man seek his own, but each his neighbor's good." 
Wherefore also he adds, "Let no man seek his own;" which he everywhere through the whole Epistle insists upon and in that to the Romans; when he says, "For even Christ pleased not Himself:" (Romans 15:3.) 
John Chrysostom, Homily 24 on 1 Corinthians, Sec. 6.


{1 Cor 10:23-24; Mt 24:28}
[7.] These things therefore knowing, let us also, beloved, consult for the good of the brethren and preserve unity with them. For to this that fearful and tremendous sacrifice leads us, warning us above all things to approach it with one mind and fervent love, and thereby becoming eagles, so to mount up to the very heaven, nay, even beyond the heaven. "For wherever the carcass is," says He, "there also will be the eagles," (Matthew 24:28.) calling His body a carcass by reason of His death. For unless He had fallen, we should not have risen again. But He calls us eagles, implying that he who draws nigh to this Body must be on high and have nothing common with the earth, nor wind himself downwards and creep along; but must ever be soaring heavenwards, and look on the Sun of Righteousness, and have the eye of his mind quick-sighted. For eagles, not crows, have a right to this table. 
John Chrysostom, Homily 24 on 1 Corinthians, Sec. 7.

{Heb 10:5-10; 1 Pet 1:18-19; Heb 9:11-14}
For if one would not inconsiderately receive a king -one would not choose to venture on it with polluted hands: I say now, if even a man's garment be what one would not venture inconsiderately to touch, what shall we say of the Body of Him Who is God over all, spotless, pure, associate with the Divine Nature, the Body whereby we are, and live; whereby the gates of Hades were broken down and the sanctuaries of heaven opened? how shall we receive this with so great insolence? Let us not, I pray you, let us not slay ourselves by our irreverence, but with all awfulness and purity draw nigh to It; and when you see It set before thee, say you to thyself, "Because of this Body am I no longer earth and ashes, no longer a prisoner, but free: because of this I hope for heaven, and to receive the good things therein, immortal life, the portion of angels, converse with Christ; this Body, nailed and scourged, was more than death could stand against; this Body the very sun saw sacrificed, and turned aside his beams; for this both the veil was rent in that moment, and rocks were burst asunder, and all the earth was shaken. This is even that Body, the blood-stained, the pierced, and that out of which gushed the saving fountains, the one of blood, the other of water, for all the world." 
John Chrysostom, Homily 24 on 1 Corinthians, Sec. 7.

{Col 2:15}
The Body that was crucified. By this were [Satan's] goads broken in pieces; by this was his head crushed; by this were the powers and the principalities made a show of. "For," says he, "having put off from himself principalities and powers, He made a show of them openly, triumphing over them in it." (Colossians 2:15.) 
Ask also Death, and say, "whence is it that thy sting hath been taken away? thy victory abolished? thy sinews cut out? and you become the laughing-stock of girls and children, who was before a terror even to kings and to all righteous men?" And he will ascribe it to this Body. For when this was crucified, then were the dead raised up, then was that prison burst, and the gates of brass were broken, and the dead were loosed, and the keepers of the gates of Hades all cowered in fear. And yet, had He been one of the many, death on the contrary should have become more mighty; but it was not so. For He was not one of the many. Therefore was death dissolved. And as they who take food which they are unable to retain, On account of that vomit up also what was before lodged in them; so also it happened unto death. That Body, which he could not digest, he received: and therefore had to cast forth that which he had within him. 
John Chrysostom, Homily 24 on 1 Corinthians, Sec. 7.

{Acts 11:24; Ps 19:5}
Yes, Death travailed in pain, whilst he held Him, and was straitened until He vomited Him up. Wherefore says the Apostle, "Having loosed the pains of death." (Acts 11:24.) For never woman laboring of child was so full of anguish as he was torn and racked in sunder, while he held the Body of the Lord. And that which happened to the Babylonian dragon, when, having taken the food it burst asunder in the midst this also happened unto him. For Christ came not forth again by the mouth of death, but having burst asunder and ripped up in the very midst, the belly of the dragon, thus from His secret chambers (Psalm 19:5.) right gloriously He issued forth and flung abroad His beams not to this heaven alone, but to the very throne most high. For even thither did He carry it up. This Body hath He given to us both to hold and to eat; a thing appropriate to intense love. For those whom we kiss vehemently, we oft-times even bite with our teeth. 
John Chrysostom, Homily 24 on 1 Corinthians, Sec. 7.

{Job 31:31}
Wherefore also Job, indicating the love of his servants towards him, said, that they ofttimes, out of their great affection towards him, said, "Oh! that we were filled with his flesh!" (Job 31:31.) Even so Christ hath given to us to be filled with His flesh, drawing us on to greater love. 
John Chrysostom, Homily 24 on 1 Corinthians, Sec. 7.

{1 Cor 10:25}
[1]
1 Cor. 10:25: Whatsoever is sold in the shambles, eat, asking no question for conscience sake. 
HAVING said that "they could not drink the cup of the Lord and the cup of the devils," and having once for all led them away from those tables, by Jewish examples, by human reasonings, by the tremendous Mysteries, by the rites solemnized among the idols; and having filled them with great fear; that he might not by this fear drive again to another extreme, and they be forced, exercising a greater scrupulosity than was necessary, to feel alarm, lest possibly even without their knowledge there might come in some such thing either from the market or from some other quarter; to release them from this strait, he says, "Whatsoever is sold in the shambles, eat, asking no question." "For," says he, "if you eat in ignorance and not knowingly, you are not subject to the punishment: it being thenceforth a matter not of greediness, but of ignorance." 
John Chrysostom, Homily 25 on 1 Corinthians, Sec. 1.

{1 Cor 10:25}
Nor does he free the man only from this anxiety, but also from another, establishing them in thorough security and liberty. For he does not even suffer them to "question;" i.e., to search and inquire, whether it be an idol-sacrifice or no such thing; but simply to eat everything which comes from the market, not even acquainting one's self with so much as this, what it is that is act before us. So that even he that eat, if in ignorance, may be rid of anxiety. For such is the nature of those things which are not in their essence evil, but through the man's intention make him unclean. Wherefore he says, "asking no question." 
John Chrysostom, Homily 25 on 1 Corinthians, Sec. 1.

{1 Cor 10:26}
Verse 26. "For to the Lord belongs the earth and the fullness thereof." 
Not to the devils. Now if the earth and the fruits and the beasts be all His, nothing is unclean: but it becomes unclean otherwise, from our intention and our disobedience. Wherefore he not only gave permission, but also,
John Chrysostom, Homily 25 on 1 Corinthians, Sec. 1.

 {1 Cor 10:27}
Verse 27. "If one of them that believe not bids you," says he, "to a feast, and you are disposed to go; whatsoever is set before you, eat, asking no question for conscience sake." 
See again his moderation. For he did not command and make a law that they should withdraw themselves, yet neither did he forbid it. And again, should they depart, he frees them from all suspicion. Now what may be the account of this? That so great curiousness might not seem to arise from any fear and cowardice. For he who makes scrupulous inquiry does so as being in dread: but he who, on hearing the fact, abstains, abstains as out of contempt and hatred and aversion. Wherefore Paul, purposing to establish both points, says, "Whatsoever is set before you, eat." 
John Chrysostom, Homily 25 on 1 Corinthians, Sec. 1.

{1 Cor 10:26-28}
Verse 28. "But if any man say to you, This has been offered in sacrifice to idols; eat not, for his sake that showed it." 
Thus it is not at all for any power that the demons have, but as accursed, that he bids abstain from them. Neither then, as though they could injure you, fly from them, (for they have no strength;) nor yet, because they have no strength, indifferently partake: for it is the table of beings who are hostile and degraded. Wherefore he said, "eat not for his sake that showed it, and for conscience sake. For the earth is the Lord's and the fullness thereof." 
See you how both when he bids them eat and when they must abstain, he brings forward the same testimony? "For I do not forbid," says he, "for this cause as though they belonged to others: ("for the earth is the Lord's") but for the reason I mentioned, for conscience sake; i.e., that it may not be injured." Ought one therefore to inquire scrupulously? "Nay" says he "for I said not your conscience, but his. For I have already said, 'for his sake that showed it."' 
John Chrysostom, Homily 25 on 1 Corinthians, Sec. 1.

{1 Cor 10:28-29; 1 Cor 5:12}
[2.] But perhaps someone may say, "The brethren indeed, as is natural, you spare, and do not suffer us to taste for their sakes, lest their conscience being weak might be emboldened to eat the idol sacrifices. But if it be some heathen, what is this man to you? Was it not your own word, 'What have I to do with judging them that are without?' (1 Corinthians 5:12.) Why then do you on the contrary care for them?" "Not for him is my care," he replies, "but in this case also for you." To which effect also he adds, "For why is my liberty judged by another conscience?" meaning by "liberty," that which is left without caution or prohibition. For this is liberty, freed from Jewish bondage. And what he means is this: "God has made me free and above all reach of injury, but the Gentile knows not how to judge my rule of life, nor to see into the liberality of my Master, but will condemn and say to himself, Christianity is a fable; they abstain from the idols, they shun demons, and yet cleave to the things offered to them: great is their gluttony.'" "And what then?" it may be said. "What harm is it to us, should he judge us unfairly?" But how much better to give him no room to judge at all'. For if you abstain, he will not even say this. "How," say you, "will he not say it? For when he sees me not making these inquiries, either in the shambles or in the banquet; what should hinder him from using this language and condemning me, as one who partakes without discrimination?" It is not so at all. For you partake, not as of idol-sacrifices, but as of things clean. And if you make no nice inquiry, it is that you may signify that you fear not the things set before you; this being the reason why, whether you enter a house of Gentiles or go into the market, I suffer you not to ask questions; viz. lest you become timid and perplexed, and occasion yourself needless trouble.
John Chrysostom, Homily 25 on 1 Corinthians, Sec. 2.

{1 Cor 10:30}
 Verse 30. "If I by grace partake, why am I evil spoken of for that for which I give thanks?" 
"Of what do you 'by grace partake?' tell me." Of the gifts of God. For His grace is so great, as to render my soul unstained and above all pollution. For as the sun sending down his beams upon many spots of pollution, withdraws them again pure; so likewise and much more, we, living in the midst of the world remain pure, if we will, by how much the power we have is even greater than his. "Why then abstain?" say you. Not as though I should become unclean, far from it; but for my brother's sake, and that I may not become a partaker with devils, and that I may not be judged by the unbeliever. For in this case it is no longer now the nature of the thing, but the disobedience and the friendship with devils which makes me unclean, and the purpose of heart works the pollution. 
John Chrysostom, Homily 25 on 1 Corinthians, Sec. 2.

{1 Cor 10:30}
But what is, "why am I evil spoken of for that for which I give thanks? "I, for my part" says he "give thanks to God that He has thus set me on high, and above the low estate of the Jews, so that from no quarter am I injured. But the Gentiles not knowing my high rule of life will suspect the contrary, and will say, 'Here are Christians indulging a taste for our customs; they are a kind of hypocrites, abusing the demons and loathing them, yet running to their tables; than which what can be more senseless? We conclude that not for truth's sake, but through ambition and love of power they have betaken themselves to this doctrine.' What folly then would it be that in respect of those things whereby I have been so benefited as even to give solemn thanks, in respect of these I should become the cause of evil-speaking?" " 
John Chrysostom, Homily 25 on 1 Corinthians, Sec. 2.

{1 Cor 10:31-32}
[3.] Verse 31. "Whether therefore you eat, or drink, or whatsoever you do, do all to the glory of God." 
Verse 32. "Give no occasion of stumbling, either to Jews, or to Greeks, or to the Church of God:" 
i.e., give no handle to anyone: since in the case supposed, both your brother is offended, and the Jew will the more hate and condemn you, and the Gentile in like manner deride you even as a gluttonous man and a hypocrite. Not only, however, should the brethren receive no hurt from us, but to the utmost of our power not even those that are without. For if we are "light," and "leaven," and "luminaries," and "salt," we ought to enlighten, not to darken; to bind, not to loosen; to draw to ourselves the unbelievers, not to drive them away. Why then putt you to flight those whom you ought to draw to you? Since even Gentiles are hurt, when they see us reverting to such things: for they know not our mind nor that our Soul has come to be above all pollution of sense. 
John Chrysostom, Homily 25 on 1 Corinthians, Sec. 3.

{1 Cor 10:33; 1 Cor 11:1}
Verse 33. "Even as I also please all men in all things, not seeking mine own profit, but the profit of the many, that they may be saved." 
Chapter 11 ver 1 "Be you imitators of me, even as I also am of Christ" 
This is a rule of the most perfect Christianity, this is a landmark exactly laid down, this is the point that stands high of all; viz. the seeking those things which are for the common profit: which also Paul himself declared, by adding, "even as I also am of Christ." For nothing can so make a man an imitator of Christ as caring for his neighbors. Nay, though you should fast, though you should lie upon the ground, and even strangle yourself, but take no thought for your neighbor; you have wrought nothing great, but still stand far from this Image, while so doing. 
John Chrysostom, Homily 25 on 1 Corinthians, Sec. 3.

{1 Cor 10:33; Ex 32:32; 2 Sam 24:17; Gen 13:9}
[4.] For no virtuous action can be very exalted, when it does not distribute its benefit to others also: as is shown by him who brought the one talent safe, and was cut in sunder because he had not made more of it. And you then, brother, though you should remain without food, though you should sleep upon the ground, though you should eat ashes and be ever wailing, and do good to no other; you will do no great work. For so also those great and noble persons who were in the beginning made this their chief care: examine accurately their life, and you will see clearly that none of them ever looked to his own things, but each one to the things of his neighbor, whence also they shone the brighter. For so Moses (to mention him first) wrought many and great wonders and signs; but nothing made him so great as that blessed voice which he uttered to God, saying, "If You will forgive their sin," forgive.'" but if not, blot me also out." (Exodus 32:32.) Such too was David: wherefore also he said, "I the shepherd have sinned, and I have done wickedly, but these, the flock, what have they done? Let Your hand be upon me and upon my father's house." (2 Samuel 24:17.) So likewise Abraham sought not his own profit, but the profit of many. Wherefore he both exposed himself to dangers and besought God for those who in no wise belonged to him. 
Well: these indeed so became glorious. But as for those who sought their own, consider what harm too they received. The nephew, for instance, of the last mentioned, because he listened to the saying, "If you will go to the right, I will go to the left;" (Genesis 13:9.) and accept-ring the choice, sought his own profit, did not even find his own: but this region was burned up, while that remained untouched. Jonah again, not seeking the profit of many, but his own, was in danger even of perishing: and while the city stood fast, he himself was tossed about and overwhelmed in the sea. But when he sought the profit of many, then he also found his own. So likewise Jacob among the flocks, not seeking his own gain, had exceeding riches for his portion. And Joseph also, seeking the profit of his brethren, found his own. 
John Chrysostom, Homily 25 on 1 Corinthians, Sec. 4.

{1 Cor 9:24}
1 Cor. 9:24: "Know you not that they which run in a race run all, but one receives the prize? 
Now this he says, not as though here also one only out of many would be saved; far from it; but to set forth the exceeding diligence which it is our duty to use. For as there, though many descend into the course not many are crowned, but this befalls one only; and it is not enough to descend into the contest, nor to anoint one's self and wrestle: so likewise here it is not sufficient to believe, and to contend in any way; but unless we have so run as to the end to show ourselves unblameable, and to come near the prize, it will profit us nothing. 
John Chrysostom, Homily 22 on 1 Corinthians, Sec. 1.

{1 Cor 9:25}
Verse 25. "And every man that strives in the games is temperate in all things." 
What is, "all things?" He does not abstain from one and err in another, but he masters entirely gluttony and lasciviousness and drunkenness and all his passions. "For this," says he, "takes place even in the heathen games. For neither is excess of wine permitted to those who contend at the time of the contest, nor wantonness, lest they should weaken their vigor, nor yet so much as to be busied about anything else, but separating themselves altogether from all things they apply themselves to their exercise only." Now if there these things be so where the crown fails to one, much more here, where the incitement in emulation is more abundant. 
John Chrysostom, Homily 22 on 1 Corinthians, Sec. 1.

{1 Cor 9:26; 1 Cor 8:8}
[2.] Verse 26. "I therefore so run, as not uncertainly." 
But what is, "not uncertainly?" "Looking to some mark," says he, "not at random and in vain, as you do. For what profit have you of entering into idol-temples, and exhibiting forsooth that perfectness? None. But not such am I, but all things whatsoever I do, I do for the salvation of my neighbor. ... But you, why dost you eat in idol-temples, tell me? Nay, you cannot assign any reasonable cause. For "food commends you not to God; neither if you eat are you the better, nor if you eat not are you the worse." (1 Corinthians 8:8.) Plainly then you run at random: for this is, "uncertainly." 
John Chrysostom, Homily 22 on 1 Corinthians, Sec. 2.

{1 Cor 9:26}
"So fight I, as not beating the air." 
This he says, again intimating that he acted not at random nor in vain. "For I have one at whom I may strike, i.e., the devil. But you dost not strike him, but simply throw away your strength." ... It is at the risk of no less than utter ruin to their own soul, and that even apart from all injury to their brethren, neither are they themselves guiltless in daring so to act. 
John Chrysostom, Homily 22 on 1 Corinthians, Sec. 2.

{1 Cor 9:27}
Verse 27. "But I buffet my body, and bring it into bondage lest by any means, after that I have preached to others, I myself should be rejected." 
Here he implies that they act subject to the lust of the belly and give up the reins to it. ... For since both fornication is caused by luxury, and it also brought forth idolatry, he naturally oftentimes inveighs against this disease; and pointing out how great things he suffered for the Gospel, he sets this also down among them. "As I went," says he, "beyond the commands, and this when it was no light matter for me. ...so also here I submit to much labor in order to live soberly. Stubborn as appetite is and the tyranny of the belly, nevertheless I bridle it and give not myself up to the passion, but endure all labor not to be drawn aside by it." "For do not, I pray you, suppose that by taking things easily I arrive at this desirable result. For it is a race and a manifold struggle, and a tyrannical nature continually rising up against me and seeking to free itself. But I bear not with it but keep it down, and bring it into subjection with many struggles." Now this he says that none may despairingly withdraw from the conflicts in behalf of virtue because the undertaking is laborious. Wherefore he says, "I buffet and bring into bondage." He said not, "I kill:" nor., "I punish" for the flesh is not to be hated, but, "I buffet and bring into bondage;" which is the part of a master not of an enemy, of a teacher not of a foe. 
John Chrysostom, Homily 22 on 1 Corinthians, Sec. 2.

{1 Cor 9:27}
"Lest by any means, having preached to others, I myself should be a rejected." 
Now if Paul feared this who had taught so many, and feared it after his preaching and becoming an angel and undertaking the leadership of the whole world; what can we say? 
For, "think not," says he, "because you have believed, that this is sufficient for your salvation: since if to me neither preaching nor teaching nor bringing over innumerable persons, is enough for salvation unless I exhibit my own conduct also unblameable, much less to you." 
John Chrysostom, Homily 22 on 1 Corinthians, Sec. 2.

{Roman Government}
In your empire, greatest of sovereigns, different nations have different customs and laws; and no one is hindered by law or fear of punishment from following his ancestral usages, however ridiculous these may be.   location 24098
Athenagoras, A Plea for the Christians, Ch. 1

{Roman Government}
In short, among every nation and people, men offer whatever sacrifices and celebrate whatever mysteries they please. The Egyptians reckon among their gods even cats, and crocodiles, and serpents, and asps, and dogs. And to all these both you and the laws give permission so to act, deeming, on the one hand, that to believe in no god at all is impious and wicked, and on the other, that it is necessary for each man to worship the gods he prefers,   location 24103
Athenagoras, A Plea for the Christians, Ch. 1

{Roman Government}
and the whole empire, under your intelligent sway, enjoys profound peace.   location 24109
Athenagoras, A Plea for the Christians, Ch. 1

{Roman Government}
But for us who are called Christians you have not in like manner cared; but although we commit no wrong-nay, as will appear in the sequel of this discourse, are of all men most piously and righteously disposed towards the Deity and towards your government-you allow us to be harassed, plundered, and persecuted, the multitude making war upon us for our name alone.   location 24109
Athenagoras, A Plea for the Christians, Ch. 1

{Mt 5:39-40}
we have learned, not only not to return blow for blow, nor to go to law with those who plunder and rob us, but to those who smite us on one side of the face to offer the other side also, and to those who take away our coat to give likewise our cloak. But, when we have surrendered our property, they plot against our very bodies and souls.   location 24116 
Athenagoras, A Plea for the Christians, Ch. 1
 
{1 Pet 2:12; Mt 5:16}
If, indeed, any one can convict us of a crime, be it small or great, we do not ask to be excused from punishment,   location 24121
Athenagoras, A Plea for the Christians, Ch. 2

{Roman Government}
For it does not comport with your justice, that others when charged with crimes should not be punished till they are convicted, but that in our case the name we bear should have more force than the evidence adduced on the trial, when the judges, instead of inquiring whether the person arraigned have committed any crime, vent their insults on the name, as if that were itself a crime.   location 24126
Athenagoras, A Plea for the Christians, Ch. 2

{1 Tim 6:3-5; 1 Tim 1:3-4; Acts 20:30}
(for no Christian is a bad man unless he falsely profess our doctrines),   location 24136
Athenagoras, A Plea for the Christians, Ch. 2

{{False Accusations Against Christians}}
Three things are alleged against us: atheism, Thyestean feasts, OEdipodean intercourse.   location 24145
Athenagoras, A Plea for the Christians, Ch. 3

{Isa 40:28; Rev 1:8; Isa 41:4; Ps 90:2}
the Deity is uncreated and eternal, to be beheld by the understanding and reason alone, while matter is created and perishable),   location 24159
Athenagoras, A Plea for the Christians, Ch. 4

{Deut 6:4; Col 1:16; Deut 4:35}
our doctrine acknowledges one God, the Maker of this universe, who is Himself uncreated (for that which is does not come to be, but that which is not) but has made all things by the Logos which is from Him,   location 24163
Athenagoras, A Plea for the Christians, Ch. 4

{Greek Philosophy}
and Sophocles agrees with him, when he says:- "There is one God, in truth there is but one, Who made the heavens, and the broad earth beneath."   location 24178
Athenagoras, A Plea for the Christians, Ch. 5

{Greek Philosophy}
Plato, then, says, "To find out the Maker and Father of this universe is difficult; and, when found, it is impossible to declare Him to all," conceiving of one uncreated and eternal God.   location 24191
Athenagoras, A Plea for the Christians, Ch. 6

{Greek Philosophy}
He is God who has framed all things by the Logos, and holds them in being by His Spirit.   location 24195
Athenagoras, A Plea for the Christians, Ch. 6

{Heb 1:1}
would be irrational for us to cease to believe in the Spirit from God, who moved the mouths of the prophets like musical instruments,   location 24214
Athenagoras, A Plea for the Christians, Ch. 7

{Isa 37:16; Isa 42:5}
For if the world, being made spherical, is confined within the circles of heaven, and the Creator of the world is above the things created,   location 24224
Athenagoras, A Plea for the Christians, Ch. 8

{Lk 24:27; Eph 3:5; Heb 1:1}
with your great zeal for knowledge, and your great attainments in learning, cannot be ignorant of the writings either of Moses or of Isaiah and Jeremiah, and the other prophets,   location 24238
Athenagoras, A Plea for the Christians, Ch. 9

{2 Pet 1:21; 2 Tim 3:16}
which they were inspired, the Spirit making use of them as a flute-player breathes into a flute;-what,   location 24240
  Athenagoras, A Plea for the Christians, Ch. 9
 
{Relationship of the Father and Son}
We acknowledge one God, uncreated, eternal, invisible, impassible, incomprehensible, illimitable, who is apprehended by the understanding only and the reason, who is encompassed by light, and beauty, and spirit, and power ineffable, by whom the universe has been created through His Logos, and set in order, and is kept in being-I have sufficiently demonstrated. [I say "His Logos"], for we acknowledge also a Son of God. Nor let anyone think it ridiculous that God should have a Son. For though the poets, in their fictions, represent the gods as no better than men, our mode of thinking is not the same as theirs, concerning either God the Father or the Son. But the Son of God is the Logos of the Father, in idea and in operation; for after the pattern of Him and by Him were all things made, the Father and the Son being one. And, the Son being in the Father and the Father in the Son, in oneness and power of spirit, the understanding and reason (nous kai logos) of the Father is the Son of God.   location 24247  
Athenagoras, A Plea for the Christians, Ch. 10

{Relationship of the Father and Son; Logos}
if, in your surpassing intelligence, it occurs to you to inquire what is meant by the Son, I will state briefly that He is the first product of the Father, not as having been brought into existence (for from the beginning, God, who is the eternal mind [nous], had the Logos in Himself, being from eternity instinct with Logos [logikos]); but inasmuch as He came forth to be the idea and energizing power of all material things, which lay like a nature without attributes, and an inactive earth, the heavier particles being mixed up with the lighter. location 24254
Athenagoras, A Plea for the Christians, Ch. 10

{Prov 8:22}
The prophetic Spirit also agrees with our statements. "The Lord," it says, "made me, the beginning of His ways to His works." The Holy Spirit Himself also, which operates in the prophets, we assert to be an effluence of God, flowing from Him, and returning back again like a beam of the sun. Who, then, would not be astonished to hear men who speak of God the Father, and of God the Son, and of the Holy Spirit, and who declare both their power in union and their distinction in order,   location 24258
Athenagoras, A Plea for the Christians, Ch. 10

{Mt 5:44-45}
What, then, are those teachings in which we are brought up? "I say unto you, Love your enemies; bless them that curse you; pray for them that persecute you; that ye may be the sons of your Father who is in heaven, who causes His sun to rise on the evil and the good, and sends rain on the just and the unjust."   location 24268  
Athenagoras, A Plea for the Christians, Ch. 11


{Mt 5:16; 1 Pet 2:12; Mt 5:39-42; 1 Pet 3:9; Mt 22:39}
But among us you will find uneducated persons, and artisans, and old women, who, if they are unable in words to prove the benefit of our doctrine, yet by their deeds exhibit the benefit arising from their persuasion of its truth: they do not rehearse speeches, but exhibit good works; when struck, they do not strike again; when robbed, they do not go to law; they give to those that ask of them, and love their neighbours as themselves.   location 24276 
Athenagoras, A Plea for the Christians, Ch. 11
  
{2 Cor 7:1; Heb 10:26-31}
Would we, then, unless we believed that a God presides over the human race, thus purge ourselves from evil?   location 24281
Athenagoras, A Plea for the Christians, Ch. 12

{1 Cor 15:32}
Are, then, those who consider life to be comprised in this, "Let us eat and drink, for to-morrow we die," and who regard death as a deep sleep and forgetfulness ("sleep and death, twin brothers" ), to be accounted pious;   location 24286
Athenagoras, A Plea for the Christians, Ch. 12

{Jn 17:3; Jn 17:22; Jn 16:15; Jn 14:26; Jn 15:26; 1 Jn 1:3}
who are conducted to the future life by this one thing alone, that they know God and His Logos, what is the oneness of the Son with the Father, what the communion of the Father with the Son, what is the Spirit, what is the unity of these three, the Spirit, the Son, the Father, and their distinction in unity;   location 24288
Athenagoras, A Plea for the Christians, Ch. 12
  
{Am 5:21-23; Jer 6:20; Isa 1:13-14}
And first, as to our not sacrificing: the Framer and Father of this universe does not need blood, nor the odour of burnt-offerings, nor the fragrance of flowers and incense location 24299
Athenagoras, A Plea for the Christians, Ch. 13

{Pagan Religion}
When, therefore, they differ among themselves concerning their gods, why do they bring the charge against us of not agreeing with them?   location 24317
Athenagoras, A Plea for the Christians, Ch. 14


{Pagan Religion}
then all cities and all nations are guilty of impiety, for they do not all acknowledge the same gods.   location 24321
Athenagoras, A Plea for the Christians, Ch. 14

{Gen 1:31; Ps 136:5; Prov 3:19}
Beautiful without doubt is the world, excelling, as well in its magnitude as in the arrangement of its parts, both those in the oblique circle and those about the north, and also in its spherical form.   location 24337
Athenagoras, A Plea for the Christians, Ch. 16

{Pagan Religion}
I assert, then, that it was Orpheus, and Homer, and Hesiod who gave both genealogies and names to those whom they call gods.   location 24358
Athenagoras, A Plea for the Christians, Ch. 17

{Jn 14:6-11; Jn 17:21-22; Col 1:16-17}
so to the one God and the Logos proceeding from Him, the Son, apprehended by us as inseparable from Him, all things are in like manner subjected.   location 24386
Athenagoras, A Plea for the Christians, Ch. 18

{Greek Philosophy}
the Stoics also say that all things will be burnt up and will again exist, the world receiving another beginning.   location 24410
Athenagoras, A Plea for the Christians, Ch. 19

{2 Pet 2:4}
how Zeus bound his father, and cast him down to Tartarus,   location 24426
Athenagoras, A Plea for the Christians, Ch. 20

{1 Cor 8:4-6; Gal 4:8}
But I have made careful inquiry, both why it is that you think the idols to have this power, and who they are that, usurping their names, produce the effects. It is necessary for me, however, in attempting to show who they are that produce the effects ascribed to the idols, and that they are not gods, to have recourse to some witnesses from among the philosophers.   location 24541
Athenagoras, A Plea for the Christians, Ch. 23

{Greek Philosophy}
First Thales, as those who have accurately examined his opinions report, divides [superior beings] into God, demons, and heroes. God he recognises as the Intelligence (nous) of the world; by demons he understands beings possessed of soul (psuchikai); and by heroes the separated souls of men, the good being the good souls, and the bad the worthless. Plato again, while withholding his assent on other points, also divides [superior beings] into the uncreated God and those produced by the uncreated One for the adornment of heaven, the planets, and the fixed stars, and into demons;   location 24543
(Plato, Timaeus., p. 40, D.E.)
[Thales]: "To speak concerning the other demons, and to know their origin, is beyond our powers; but we ought to believe those who have before spoken, the descendants of gods, as they say"  location 24548
Athenagoras, A Plea for the Christians, Ch. 23

{Prov 8:1-31; Mt 3:11}
For, as we acknowledge a God, and a Son his Logos, and a Holy Spirit, united in essence,-the Father, the Son, the Spirit, because the Son is the Intelligence, Reason, Wisdom of the Father, and the Spirit an effluence, as light from fire;   location 24573 
Athenagoras, A Plea for the Christians, Ch. 24


{Mt 13:41-42; Mt 24:31; Rev 10:1-3}
For this is the office of the angels,-to exercise providence for God over the things created and ordered by Him; so that God may have the universal and general providence of the whole, while the particular parts are provided for by the angels appointed over them.   location 24581 
 Athenagoras, A Plea for the Christians, Ch. 24

{Jude 6}
Just as with men, who have freedom of choice as to both virtue and vice (for you would not either honour the good or punish the bad, unless vice and virtue were in their own power; and some are diligent in the matters entrusted to them by you, and others faithless), so is it among the angels. Some, free agents, you will observe, such as they were created by God, continued in those things for which God had made and over which He had ordained them; but some outraged both the constitution of their nature and the government entrusted to them:   location 24583
Athenagoras, A Plea for the Christians, Ch. 24

{Gen 6:1,2}
these fell into impure love of virgins, and were subjugated by the flesh, and he became negligent and wicked in the management of the things entrusted to him. Of these lovers of virgins, therefore, were begotten those who are called giants. And if something has been said by the poets, too, about the giants, be not surprised at this:   location 24588
Athenagoras, A Plea for the Christians, Ch. 24

{Gen 6:1-4; 1 Cor 10:20}
These angels, then, who have fallen from heaven, and haunt the air and the earth, and are no longer able to rise to heavenly things, and the souls of the giants, which are the demons who wander about the world, perform actions similar, the one (that is, the demons) to the natures they have received, the other (that is, the angels) to the appetites they have indulged.   location 24594
Athenagoras, A Plea for the Christians, Ch. 25

{1 Cor 10:20}
They who draw men to idols, then, are the aforesaid demons, who are eager for the blood of the sacrifices, and lick them; but the gods that please the multitude, and whose names are given to the images, were men, as may be learned from their history. And that it is the demons who act under their names, is proved by the nature of their operations. location 24622
Athenagoras, A Plea for the Christians, Ch. 26


{1 Cor 10:20}
moreover, those who exert the power are not the same as those to whom the statues are erected,   location 24628
Athenagoras, A Plea for the Christians, Ch. 26

{1 Tim 4:1}
When, too, a tender and susceptible soul, which has no knowledge or experience of sounder doctrines, and is unaccustomed to contemplate truth, and to consider thoughtfully the Father and Maker of all things, gets impressed with false opinions respecting itself, then the demons who hover about matter, greedy of sacrificial odours and the blood of victims, and ever ready to lead men into error, avail themselves of these delusive movements of the souls of the multitude;   location 24645
Athenagoras, A Plea for the Christians, Ch. 27

{Pagan Religion}
affirm that they learnt from them that the gods had been men.   location 24654
Athenagoras, A Plea for the Christians, Ch. 28


{Pagan Religion}
deposed Typhon, and ruled over Egypt as its last god-king. Osiris is named Dionysus (Bacchus) by the Greeks." "Almost all the names of the gods came into Greece from Egypt." Apollo was the son of Dionysus and Isis, as Herodotus likewise affirms: "According to the Egyptians, Apollo and Diana are the children of Bacchus and Isis;   location 24657
Athenagoras, A Plea for the Christians, Ch. 28

{Titus 1:12}
Note: Callim., Hym. Jov., 8 sq. [Tit. i. 12. But St. Paul's quotation is from Epimenides.]
"The Cretans always lie; for they, O king, Have built a tomb to thee who art not dead."   location 24717
Athenagoras, A Plea for the Christians, Ch. 30


{{False Accusations Against Christians}}
But they have further also made up stories against us of impious feasts and forbidden intercourse between the sexes,   location 24729
Athenagoras, A Plea for the Christians, Ch. 31


{Heb 4:13; 2 Pet 3:13-14; 1 Pet 1:14-17}
you know that those whose life is directed towards God as its rule, so that each one among us may be blameless and irreproachable before Him, will not entertain even the thought of the slightest sin. For if we believed that we should live only the present life, then we might be suspected of sinning, through being enslaved to flesh and blood, or overmastered by gain or carnal desire; but since we know that God is witness to what we think and what we say both by night and by day, and that He, being Himself light, sees all things in our heart, we are persuaded that when we are removed from the present life we shall live another life,   location 24737
Athenagoras, A Plea for the Christians, Ch. 31


{1 Cor 15:40-49}
(since we shall abide near God, and with God, free from all change or suffering in the soul, not as flesh, even though we shall have flesh, but as heavenly spirit),   location 24742
Athenagoras, A Plea for the Christians, Ch. 31

{Mt 5:28}
But we are so far from practicing promiscuous intercourse, that it is not lawful among us to indulge even a lustful look. "For," saith He, "he that looks on a woman to lust after her,   location 24750
Athenagoras, A Plea for the Christians, Ch. 32
  

{1 Tim 5:2; 1 Thess 4:3-8}
On behalf of those, then, to whom we apply the names of brothers and sisters, and other designations of relationship, we exercise the greatest care that their bodies should remain undefiled and uncorrupted;   location 24758
Athenagoras, A Plea for the Christians, Ch. 32


{Rom. 16:16; 1 Cor 16:20}
for the Logos again says to us, "If anyone kiss a second time because it has given him pleasure, [he sins];"   location 24759
(Probably from some spurious writing.)
"Therefore the kiss, or rather the salutation, should be given with the greatest care, since, if there be mixed with it the least defilement of thought, it excludes us from eternal life."   location 24760  
Athenagoras, A Plea for the Christians, Ch. 32

{1 Cor 7:1-9}
each of us reckoning her his wife whom he has married according to the laws laid down by us, and that only for the purpose of having children. For as the husbandman throwing the seed into the ground awaits the harvest, not sowing more upon it, so to us the procreation of children is the limit of our indulgence in appetite.   location 24763
Athenagoras, A Plea for the Christians, Ch. 33

{Mt 19:12}
Nay, you would find many among us, both men and women, growing old unmarried, in hope of living in closer communion with God. But if the remaining in virginity and in the state of an eunuch brings nearer to God,   location 24766 
Athenagoras, A Plea for the Christians, Ch. 33

{Mt 19:9; 1 Cor 7:7-13}
(*But Callistus, heretical Bishop of Rome (a.d. 218.), authorized even third marriages in the clergy. Hippolytus, vol. vi. p. 343, Ante-Nicene Fathers, )
a person should either remain as he was born, or be content with one marriage; for a second marriage is only a specious adultery. "For whosoever puts away his wife," says He, "and marries another, commits adultery;" not permitting a man to send her away whose virginity he has brought to an end, nor to marry again. For he who deprives himself of his first wife, even though she be dead, is a cloaked adulterer*, resisting the hand of God, because in the beginning God made one man and one woman,   location 24769
Athenagoras, A Plea for the Christians, Ch. 33

 {Rom 1:26-27}
For those who have set up a market for fornication and established infamous resorts for the young for every kind of vile pleasure,-who do not abstain even from males, males with males committing shocking abominations, outraging all the noblest and comeliest bodies in all sorts of ways, so dishonouring the fair workmanship of God   location 24776 
Athenagoras, A Plea for the Christians, Ch. 34
 
{Mt 5:21-22}
And yet we have slaves, some more and some fewer, by whom we could not help being seen; but even of these, not one has been found to invent even such things against us. For when they know that we cannot endure even to see a man put to death, though justly; who of them can accuse us of murder or cannibalism?   location 24789
Athenagoras, A Plea for the Christians, Ch. 35

{1 Thess 5:22; 1 Pet 4:3; Rom 13:9-10; 1 Jn 3:15}
Who does not reckon among the things of greatest interest the contests of gladiators and wild beasts, especially those which are given by you? But we, deeming that to see a man put to death is much the same as killing him, have abjured such spectacles.   location 24791  
Athenagoras, A Plea for the Christians, Ch. 35

{1 Pet 4:15; Ps 139:13-16}
And when we say that those women who use drugs to bring on abortion commit murder, and will have to give an account to God for the abortion, on what principle should we commit murder?   location 24793  
Athenagoras, A Plea for the Christians, Ch. 35

{1 Pet 4:15; Ps 139:13-16}
For it does not belong to the same person to regard the very fetus in the womb as a created being, and therefore an object of God's care, and when it has passed into life, to kill it; and not to expose an infant, because those who expose them are chargeable with child-murder, and on the other hand, when it has been reared to destroy it.   location 24795  
Athenagoras, A Plea for the Christians, Ch. 35


{False Accusations Against Christians}
For it is not the part of the same persons to believe that our bodies will rise again, and to eat them as if they would not;   location 24800
Athenagoras, A Plea for the Christians, Ch. 36

{Rom 13:1-7}
And now do you, who are entirely in everything, by nature and by education, upright, and moderate, and benevolent, and worthy of your rule,   location 24816
Athenagoras, A Plea for the Christians, Ch. 37

{1 Tim 2:1-3}
For who are more deserving to obtain the things they ask, than those who, like us, pray for your government, that you may, as is most equitable, receive the kingdom, son from father, and that your empire may receive increase and addition, all men becoming subject to your sway? And this is also for our advantage, that we may lead a peaceable and quiet life, and may ourselves readily perform all that is commanded us.   location 24818
Athenagoras, A Plea for the Christians, Ch. 37

{Gal 2:5; Gal 5:9-10}
For the farmer could not properly cast the seed into the ground, unless he first extirpated the wild wood, and whatever would be hurtful to the good seed;   location 24839
Athenagoras, On the Resurrection of the Dead, Ch.1

{2 Tim 4:3-4; Mt 16:6-12}
Neither surely can he who wishes to teach the truth persuade any one by speaking about it, so long as there is a false opinion lurking in the mind of his hearers, and barring the entrance of his arguments.   location 24841
Athenagoras, On the Resurrection of the Dead, Ch.1

{Eph 4:18-19; Rom 1:21}
the most unaccountable thing of all being, that they are in this state of mind without having any ground whatsoever in the matters themselves for their disbelief, or finding it possible to assign any reasonable cause why they disbelieve or experience any perplexity.location 24846
Athenagoras, On the Resurrection of the Dead, Ch.1

Chapter II A Resurrection is Not Impossible   location 24849

{Jn 3:18-21; Rom 1:19-25; Rev 21:8}
to disbelieve things which are not deserving of disbelief, is the act of men who do not employ a sound judgment about the truth.   location 24852
Athenagoras, On the Resurrection of the Dead, Ch. 2

{Mt 22:29; 1 Cor 15:12-22}
This they will succeed in, if they are able to show that it is either impossible for God, or contrary to His will, to unite and gather together again bodies that are dead, or even entirely dissolved into their elements, so as to constitute the same persons. If they cannot do this, let them cease from this godless disbelief, and from this blasphemy against sacred things:   location 24857
Athenagoras, On the Resurrection of the Dead, Ch. 2

{Rom 4:17}
it is a greater thing to know beforehand that which has not yet come to pass; but, viewed relatively to the majesty and wisdom of God, both are according to nature, and it is equally easy to know beforehand things that have not yet come into existence, and to know things which have been dissolved.   location 24872
Athenagoras, On the Resurrection of the Dead, Ch. 2

{Heb 2:10; Ps 8:4; Job 7:16-18}
The argument from the cause will appear, if we consider whether man was made at random and in vain, or for some purpose;   location 25040
Athenagoras, On the Resurrection of the Dead, Ch. 12

{2 Cor 5:1-4}
a man makes a house for his own use, but for cattle and camels and other animals of which he has need he makes the shelter suitable for each of them; not for his own use, if we regard the appearance only, though for that, if we look at the end he has in view, but as regards the immediate object, from concern for those for whom he cares. He has children, too, not for his own use, nor for the sake of anything else belonging to him, but that those who spring from him may exist and continue as long as possible, thus by the succession of children and grandchildren comforting himself respecting the close of his own life, and hoping in this way to immortalize the mortal.   location 25046
Athenagoras, On the Resurrection of the Dead, Ch. 12

{Isa 40:12-26}
But God can neither have made man in vain, for He is wise, and no work of wisdom is in vain; nor for His own use, for He is in want of nothing. But to a Being absolutely in need of nothing, no one of His works can contribute anything to His own use.   location 25051
Athenagoras, On the Resurrection of the Dead, Ch. 12

{2 Cor 5:1; Resurrection of Children}
 the fallacy of this is very clearly shown, from the fact that, although all human beings who die rise again, yet not all who rise again are to be judged: for if only a just judgment were the cause of the resurrection, it would of course follow that those who had done neither evil nor good-namely, very young children-would not rise again; but seeing that all are to rise again, those who have died in infancy as well as others, they too justify our conclusion that the resurrection takes place not for the sake of the judgment as the primary reason, but in consequence of the purpose of God in forming men, and the nature of the beings so formed.   location 25095
Athenagoras, On the Resurrection of the Dead, Ch. 14

{1 Cor 15:40-49}
For if the whole nature of men in general is composed of an immortal soul and a body which was fitted to it in the creation, and if neither to the nature of the soul by itself, nor to the nature of the body separately, has God assigned such a creation or such a life and entire course of existence as this, but to men compounded of the two, in order that they may, when they have passed through their present existence, arrive at one common end, with the same elements of which they are composed at their birth and during life,   location 25104
Athenagoras, On the Resurrection of the Dead, Ch. 15

{1 Cor 15:40-49}
Man, therefore, who consists of the two parts, must continue forever. But it is impossible for him to continue unless he rise again. For if no resurrection were to take place, the nature of men as men would not continue. And if the nature of men does not continue, in vain has the soul been fitted to the need of the body and to its experiences; in vain has the body been fettered so that it cannot obtain what it longs for, obedient to the reins of the soul, and guided by it as with a bridle;   location 25122
Athenagoras, On the Resurrection of the Dead, Ch. 15

{1 Cor 15:40-49; 2 Cor 5:1-4}
men, in respect of the soul, have from their first origin an unchangeable continuance, but in respect of the body obtain immortality by means of change. This is what is meant by the doctrine of the resurrection; and, looking to this, we both await the dissolution of the body, as the sequel to a life of want and corruption, and after this we hope for a continuance with immortality, not putting either our death on a level with the death of the irrational animals, or the continuance of man with the continuance of immortals, lest we should unawares in this way put human nature and life on a level with things with which it is not proper to compare them.   location 25136
Athenagoras, On the Resurrection of the Dead, Ch. 16

{1 Thess 4:13-14; Acts 7:60}
those who sleep are subject to similar states, as regards at least the stillness and the absence of all sense of the present or the past, or rather of existence itself and their own life.   location 25145
Athenagoras, On the Resurrection of the Dead, Ch. 16

{Jn 5:28-29; 1 Cor 15:52; Mt 27:52}
for a time it is interrupted by the separation of the soul from the body.   location 25148
Athenagoras, On the Resurrection of the Dead, Ch. 16

{Rom 2:6; Rev 20:12-13; Rev 2:23}
God as judging men according as they have lived well or ill,   location 25171
Athenagoras, On the Resurrection of the Dead, Ch. 18

{Ps 37:1-40; Lk 16:25; Heb 11:32-40; Acts 14:22; Rev 7:14-17}
(for the award according to merit finds no place in the present existence, since many atheists and persons who practice every iniquity and wickedness live on to the last, unvisited by calamity, whilst, on the contrary, those who have manifestly lived an exemplary life in respect of every virtue, live in pain, in insult, in calumny and outrage, and suffering of all kinds)   location 25190
Athenagoras, On the Resurrection of the Dead, Ch. 18

{1 Cor 15:32}
that maxim, so dear to the intemperate and lewd, "Let us eat and drink, for to-morrow we die."   location 25210
Athenagoras, On the Resurrection of the Dead, Ch. 19

{Rom 2:6; Rev 20:12-13; Rev 2:23}
But if the Maker of men takes any concern about His own works, and the distinction is anywhere to be found between those who have lived well and ill, it must be either in the present life, while men are still living who have conducted themselves virtuously or viciously, or after death, when men are in a state of separation and dissolution. But according to neither of these suppositions can we find a just judgment taking place; for neither do the good in the present life obtain the rewards of virtue, nor yet do the bad receive the wages of vice.   location 25211
Athenagoras, On the Resurrection of the Dead, Ch. 19

{1 Cor 15:42-44; Ps 22:26; Ps 23:6; Ps 49:7-9; Eccl 12:7; Dan 12:2-3; Mt 25:46; 1 Cor 15:12-19}
For either death is the entire extinction of life, the soul being dissolved and corrupted along with the body, or the soul remains by itself, incapable of dissolution, of dispersion, of corruption, whilst the body is corrupted and dissolved,   location 25224
Athenagoras, On the Resurrection of the Dead, Ch. 20

{Jn 5:28-29; Rom 2:6-11; Rev 20:12-13; Rev 2:23}
Yet equity is wanting to the judgment, if the being is not preserved in existence who practiced righteousness or lawlessness: for that which practiced each of the things in life on which the judgment is passed was man, not soul by itself.   location 25231
Athenagoras, On the Resurrection of the Dead, Ch. 20

{Jn 5:28-29}
it is in the highest degree unjust and unworthy of the judgment of God to lay upon the soul alone the sins which spring from them, and the consequent punishments.   location 25257
Athenagoras, On the Resurrection of the Dead, Ch. 21

{Jn 5:28-29}
But the most irrational thing of all is this: to impose properly sanctioned laws on men, and then to assign to their souls alone the recompense of their lawful or unlawful deeds.   location 25274
Athenagoras, On the Resurrection of the Dead, Ch. 23

{1 Cor 6:18; Lk 20:34-38}
nor could the command, "Thou shalt not commit adultery," ever be properly addressed to souls, or even thought of in such a connection, since the difference of male and female does not exist in them, nor any aptitude for sexual intercourse,   location 25280
Athenagoras, On the Resurrection of the Dead, Ch. 23

{Ps 8:4; Rom 2:14-15; Eccl 12:13}
For do we not see that husbandmen have one end, and physicians another; and again, the things which spring out of the earth another, and the animals nourished upon it, and produced according to a certain natural series, another? If this is evident, and natural and artificial powers, and the actions arising from these, must by all means be accompanied by an end in accordance with nature, it is absolutely necessary that the end of men, since it is that of a peculiar nature, should be separated from community with the rest; for it is not lawful to suppose the same end for beings destitute of rational judgment, and of those whose actions are regulated by the innate law and reason, and who live an intelligent life and observe justice.   location 25298
Athenagoras, On the Resurrection of the Dead, Ch. 24

{Rev 7:15; Mt 27:52; Rev 22:12; Col 3:1-3; 1 Jn 3:2-3}
soul should obtain the same body is impossible in any other way, and possible only by the resurrection; for if this takes place, an end befitting the nature of men follows also. And we shall make no mistake in saying, that the final cause of an intelligent life and rational judgment, is to be occupied uninterruptedly with those objects to which the natural reason is chiefly and primarily adapted, and to delight unceasingly in the contemplation of Him who is, and of His decrees, notwithstanding that the majority of men, because they are affected too passionately and too violently by things below, pass through life without attaining this object. For the large number of those who fail of the end that belongs to them does not make void the common lot, since the examination relates to individuals, and the reward or punishment of lives ill or well spent is proportioned to the merit of each.   location 25317
Athenagoras, On the Resurrection of the Dead, Ch. 25

{1 Cor 6:1}
[4.] Chapter 6:1. "Dare anyone of you, having a matter against his brother, go to law before the unrighteous, and not before the saints?" 
Here also he again makes his complaint upon acknowledged grounds; for in that other place he says, "It is actually reported that there is fornication among you." And in this place, "Dare anyone of you?" From the very first outset giving signs of his anger, and implying that the thing spoken of comes of a daring and lawless spirit. 
... So here, you see, since he had made mention of covetous brethren, burning with anxiety to correct those in sin, he brooks not exactly to observe order; but he again corrects the sin which had been introduced out of the regular course, and so returns to the former subject. 
Let us hear then what he also says about this. "Dare any of you, having a matter, go to law before the unrighteous, and not before the saints?" ...  But when he had stricken them down by many words, then he even takes away entirely all going to law. "For in the first place," says he, "if one must go to law it were wrong to do so before the unrighteous. But you ought not to go to law at all." This however he adds afterwards. For the present he thoroughly sifts the former subject, namely, that they should not submit matters to external arbitration. "For," says he, "how can it be otherwise than absurd that one who is at variance with his friend should take his enemy to be a reconciler between them? And how can you avoid feeling shame and blushing when a Greek sits to judge a Christian? And if about private matters it is not right to go to law before Greeks, how shall we submit to their decisions about other things of greater importance?" 
Observe, moreover, how he speaks. He says not, "Before the unbelievers," but, "Before the unrighteous;" using the expression of which he had most particular need for the matter before him, in order to deter and keep them away. For see that his discourse was about going to law, and those who are engaged in suits seek for nothing so much as that the judges should feel great interest about what is just; he takes this as a ground of dissuasion. ... And because it would have been intolerable to be told at once not to go to law, he did not immediately add this, but only changed the judges, bringing the party engaged in the trial from without into the Church. 
John Chrysostom, Homily 15 on 1 Corinthians, Sec. 4.

{1 Cor 6:1-2; Mt 12:42}
[5.] Then, since it seemed easily open to contempt, I mean our being judged by those who were within, and especially at that time, (for they were not perhaps competent to comprehend a point, nor were they such as the heathen judges, well skilled in laws and rhetoric, inasmuch as the greater part of them were uneducated men,) mark how he makes them worthy of credit, first calling them "saints." But seeing that this bore witness to purity of life, and not to accuracy in hearing a case, observe how he orderly handles this part also, saying thus, "Do you not know that the saints shall judge the world?" How then can you who are in your day to judge them, endure to be judged by them now? They will not indeed judge, taking their seat in person and demanding account, yet they shall condemn. This at least he plainly said; "And if the world is judged in you, are you unworthy to judge the small matters?" He says not "by you," but "in you:" just as when He said, (Matthew 12:42.) "The queen of the south shall rise up and condemn this generation:" and, "The men of Nineveh shall arise and condemn this generation." For when beholding the same sun and sharing all the same things, we shall be found believers but they unbelievers, they will not be able to take refuge in ignorance. For we shall accuse them, simply by the things which we have done. And many such ways of judgment one will find there. 
Then, that no one should think he speaks about other persons, mark how he generalizes his speech. "And if the world is judged in you, are you unworthy to judge the small matters?" 
The thing is a disgrace to you, he says, and an unspeakable reproach. For since it was likely that they would be out of countenance at being judged by those that were within; "nay," says he, "on the contrary, the disgrace is when you are judged by those without: for those are the very small controversies, not these." 
John Chrysostom, Homily 15 on 1 Corinthians, Sec. 5.

{1 Cor 6:3; Mt 25:41; 2 Cor 11:15}
Verse 3. "Know you not that we shall judge angels? how much more, things which pertain to this life? 
Some say that here the elders are hinted at, but away with this. His speech is about demons. For had he been speaking about corrupt elders, he would have meant them above when he said, "the world is judged in you:" (for the Scripture is wont to call evil men also "The world:") and he would not have said the same thing twice, nor would he, as if he was saying something of greater consequence, have put it down afterwards. But he speaks concerning those angels about whom Christ says, "Depart you into the fire which is prepared for the devil and his angels." (Matthew 25:41.) And Paul, "his angels fashion themselves as ministers of righteousness." (2 Corinthians 11:15.) For when the very incorporeal powers shall be found inferior to us who are clothed with flesh, they shall suffer heavier punishment. 
John Chrysostom, Homily 15 on 1 Corinthians, Sec. 5.

{1 Cor 6:4}
[6.] Verse 4. "If then you have to judge things pertaining to this life, set them to judge who are of no account in the Church. 
For what he says is something like this: Perhaps someone will say, "No one among you is wise, nor competent to pass sentence; all are contemptible." Now what follows? "Even though none be wise," says he, "I bid you entrust things to those who are of least weight." 
John Chrysostom, Homily 15 on 1 Corinthians, Sec. 6.

{1 Cor 6:5}
Verse 5. "But this I say to move you to shame." 
These are the words of one exposing their objection as being an idle pretext: and therefore he adds, "Is it so that there is not a wise man among you, no not even one?" Is the scarcity, says he, so great? so great the want of sensible persons among you? And what he subjoins strikes even still harder. For having said, "Is it so, that there is not a wise man among you, not even one?" he adds, "who shall be able to judge in the case of his brother." For when brother goes to law with brother, there is never any need of understanding and talent in the person who is mediating in the cause, the feeling and relationship contributing greatly to the settlement of such a quarrel. 
John Chrysostom, Homily 15 on 1 Corinthians, Sec. 6.

{1 Cor 6:6}
"But brother goes to law with brother, and that before unbelievers." 
Do you observe with what effect he disparaged the judges at first by calling them unrighteous; whereas here, to move shame, he calls them Unbelievers? For surely it is extremely disgraceful if the elder could not be the author of reconciliation even among brethren, but recourse must be had to those without. So that when he said, "those who are of no account," his chief meaning was not that the Church's outcasts should be appointed as judges, but to find fault with them. ... For what else can it be than absurd, that whereas on a quarrel arising in a house we call in no one from without and feel ashamed if news get abroad among strangers of what is going on within doors; where the Church is, the treasure of the unutterable Mysteries, there all things should be published without? 
Verse 6. "But brother goes to law with brother, and that before unbelievers." 
The charge is twofold; both that he "goes to law," and "before the unbelievers." For if even the thing by itself, To go to law with a brother, be a fault, to do it also before aliens, what pardon does it admit of? 
John Chrysostom, Homily 15 on 1 Corinthians, Sec. 6.

{1 Cor 6:7}
[7.] Verse 7. "Nay, already it is altogether a defect in you, that you have lawsuits one with another." 
Thus far, the act itself of going to law brings each party under his censure, and in that respect one is not at all better than another. But whether one go to law justly or unjustly, that is quite another subject. Say not then, "which did the wrong?" For on this ground I at once condemn you, even for the act of going to law. Now if being unable to bear a wrong-doer be a fault, what accusation can come up to the actual wrong? "Why not rather take wrong? Why not rather be defrauded?" 
John Chrysostom, Homily 15 on 1 Corinthians, Sec. 7.

{1 Cor 6:8}
Verse 8. "Nay, you yourselves do wrong, and defraud, and that your brethren." 
Again, it is a twofold crime, perhaps even threefold or fourfold. One, not to know how to bear being wronged. Another, actually to do wrong. A third, to commit the settlement of these matters even to the unjust. And yet a fourth, that it should be so done to a brother. 
John Chrysostom, Homily 15 on 1 Corinthians, Sec. 7.

{1 Cor 6:9-10}
[8.] Having thus, you see, abashed them from arguments on general principles, and before that, from the rewards proposed; he shuts up the exhortation with a threat, making his speech more peremptory, and saying thus, (ver. 9.) "Know you not that the unrighteous shall not inherit the kingdom of God? Be not deceived: neither fornicators, nor idolaters, nor adulterers, nor effeminate, nor abusers of themselves with men, (ver. 10.) nor covetous, nor thieves, nor drunkards, nor revilers, nor extortioners, shall inherit the kingdom of God." What say you? When discoursing about covetous persons, have you brought in upon us so vast a crowd of lawless men? "Yes," says he, "but in doing this, I am not confusing my discourse, but going on in regular order." For as when discoursing about the unclean he made mention of all together; so again, on mentioning the covetous he brings forward all, thus making his rebukes familiar to those who have such things on their conscience. For the continual mention of the punishment laid up for others makes the reproof easy to be received, when it comes into conflict with our own sins. And so in the present instance he utters his threat, being spoken indefinitely and so wounding his conscience secretly. 
John Chrysostom, Homily 15 on 1 Corinthians, Sec. 8.


{1 Cor 6:9-10; Ps 50:21}
"Be not deceived." Here he glances at certain who maintain (what indeed most men assert now) that God being good and kind to man, takes not vengeance upon our misdeeds: "Let us not then be afraid. For never will he exact justice of anyone for anything." And it is on account of these that he says, "Be not deceived." For it belongs to the extreme of error and delusion, after depending on good to meet with the contrary; and to surmise such things about God as even in man no one would think of. Wherefore says the Prophet in His person, (Psalm 49:LXX. 1. Hebrews ver. 21.) "You have conceived iniquity, that I shall be like to you: I will reprove you and set before your face your iniquities." And Paul here, "Be not deceived; neither fornicators," (he puts first the one that was already condemned,) "nor adulterers, nor effeminate, nor drunkards, nor revilers, shall inherit the kingdom of God." 

{1 Cor 6:9-10}
Many have attacked this place as extremely severe, since he places the drunkard and the reviler with the adulterer and the abominable and the abuser of himself with mankind. And yet the offenses are not equal: how then is the award of punishment the same? What shall we say then? First, that drunkenness is no small thing; Nor reviling, seeing that Christ Himself delivered over to hell him that called his brother fool. And often that sin has brought forth death. Again, the Jewish people too committed the greatest of their sins through drunkenness. In the next place, it is not of punishment that he is so far discoursing, but of exclusion from the kingdom. Now from the kingdom both one and the other are equally thrust out; but whether in hell they will find any difference, it belongs not to this present occasion to inquire. 
John Chrysostom, Homily 15 on 1 Corinthians, Sec. 8.

{1 Cor 6:11}
[9.] Verse 11. "And such were some of you: but you were washed, but you were sanctified." 
In a way to abash them exceedingly, he adds this: as if he said, "Consider from what evils God delivered us; how great an experiment and demonstration of loving-kindness He afforded us! He did not limit His redemption to mere deliverance, but greatly extended the benefit: for He also made you clean. Was this then all? Nay: but He also "sanctified." Nor even is this all: He also "justified." Yet even bare deliverance from our sins were a great gift: but now He also filled you with countless blessing. And this He has done, "In the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ;" not in this name or in that: yea also, "In the Spirit of our God." 
Knowing therefore these things, beloved, and bearing in mind the greatness of the blessing which has been wrought, let us both continue to live soberly, being pure from all things that have been enumerated.

{1 Cor 6:11; Mt 5:40; Mt 5:25}
And let us avoid the tribunals which are in the forums of the Gentiles; and the noble birth which God has freely given us, the same let us preserve to the end. For think how full of shame it is that a Greek should take his seat and deal out justice to you. But you will say, what if he that is within judge contrary to the law? Why should he? tell me. For I would know by what kind of laws the Greek administers justice, and by what the Christian? Is it not quite plain that the laws of men are the rule of the Greek, but those of God, of the Christian? Surely then with the latter there is greater chance of justice. ... For in regard to those without, besides what has been said, there are many other things also to suspect; talent in speakers and corruption in magistrates and many other things which are the ruin of justice. ... "But what if he acquiesce not, but both despise those within and forcibly drag the course without?" Better were it to submit willingly to what you are likely to endure by compulsion, and not go to law, that you may have also a reward. For, (Matthew 5:40.) "If anyone will go to law with you, and take away your coat, you shall let him have your cloak also:" and, (v. 25.) "Agree with your adversary quickly, whilst you are with him in the way." And why need I speak of our rules? For even the pleaders in the heathen courts very often tell us this, saying, "it were better to make up matters out of court." 
John Chrysostom, Homily 15 on 1 Corinthians, Sec. 9.

{1 Cor 6:11; Mt 5:40}
[10.] Now then, if you commit injustice, it is plain that you cannot be righteous: but if you are injured and bear it, (for this is a special mark of a righteous man,) you have no need of the laws which are without. "How then," say you, "shall I be able to bear it when injured?" And yet Christ has commanded something even more than this. For not only has he commanded you when injured to bear it, but even to give abundantly more to the wrong-doer; and in your zeal for suffering ill to surpass his eagerness for doing it. For he said not, "to him that will sue you at law, and take away your coat, give your coat," but, "together with that give also your cloak." ...
And to shew that this is true; tell me, which conquered at the dunghill? Which was defeated? Job who was stripped of all, or the devil who stripped him of all? Evidently the devil who stripped him of all. Whom do we admire for the victory, the devil that smote, or Job that was smitten? Clearly, Job. And yet he could not retain his perishing wealth nor save his children. Why speak I of riches and children? He could not insure to himself bodily health. Yet nevertheless this is the conqueror, he that lost all that he had. His riches indeed he could not keep; but his piety he kept with all Strictness. 
John Chrysostom, Homily 15 on 1 Corinthians, Sec. 10.

{1 Cor 6:11; Gal 6:7-8}
[11.] Knowing these things, therefore, let us of our free choice go on strict principles, and not be like the unwise, who think that they are then not wronged, when their suffering wrong is the result of a trial. 
John Chrysostom, Homily 15 on 1 Corinthians, Sec. 11.


{1 Cor 6:12}
[1] "All things are lawful for me, but not all things are beneficial. All things are lawful for me, but I will not be brought into the power of any. 
HERE he glances at the gluttons. For since he intends to assail the fornicator again, and fornication arises from luxuriousness and want of moderation, he strongly chastises this passion. It cannot be that he speaks thus with regard to things forbidden, such not being "lawful:" but of things which seem to be indifferent. To illustrate my meaning: "It is lawful," he says, "to eat and to drink; but it is not beneficial with excess." ... And he signifies that to do what is in one's power not only is not beneficial, but even is not a part of power, but of slavery. 
... This is his meaning: "You are at liberty to eat," says he; "well then, remain in liberty, and take heed that you do not become a slave to this appetite: for he who uses it properly, he is master of it; but he that exceeds the proper measure is no longer its master but its slave, since gluttony reigns paramount within him." Do you perceive how, where the man thought he had authority Paul points out that he is under authority? ... For mark; each of them was saying, "I have power to live luxuriously." He replies, "In doing so, you are not so much acting as one who had power over a thing, but rather as being thyself subject to some such power. For you have not power even over your own belly, so long as you are dissolute, but it has power over you." And the same we may say both of riches and of other things. 
John Chrysostom, Homily 17 on 1 Corinthians, Sec. 1.

{1 Cor 6:13; Phil 3:19}
Verse 13. "Foods for the belly." 
By "the belly" here he means not the stomach, but the stomach's voraciousness. As when he says, (Philippians 3:19.) "Whose God is their belly:" not speaking about that part of the body, but about greediness. To prove that so it is, hear what follows: "And the belly for foods; but the body is not for fornication, but for the Lord." And yet "the belly" also is of "the body." But he puts down two pairs of things, "foods" and gluttony, (which he terms "the belly;") "Christ," and "the body." 
What then is the meaning of, "Foods for the belly?" "Foods," he says, are on good terms with gluttony, and it with them. It cannot therefore lead us to Christ, but drags towards these. For it is a strong and brutal passion, and makes us slaves, and puts us upon ministering to the belly. Why then are you excited and gaping after food, O man? For the end of that service is this, and nothing further shall be seen of it: but as one was waiting on some mistress, it abides keeping up this slavery, and advances no further, and has no other employment but this same fruitless one. And the two are connected together and destroyed together; "the belly" with "the foods," and "the foods" with "the belly;" winding out a sort of interminable course; .... But these things he says not concerning food and the body, but it is the passion of greediness and excess in eatables which he is censuring: and what follows shows it. 
John Chrysostom, Homily 17 on 1 Corinthians, Sec. 1.

{1 Cor 6:13; 1 Tim 6:8}
"But God shall bring to nought both it and them:" speaking not of the stomach, but of immoderate desire: not of food but of high feeding. For with the former he is not angry, but even lays down rules about them, saying, (1 Timothy 6:8.) "Having food and covering we shall be therewith content." However, thus he stigmatizes the whole thing; its amendment (after advice given) being left by him to prayer. But some say that the words are a prophecy, declaring the state which shall be in the life to come, and that there is no eating or drinking there. Now if that which is moderate shall have an end, much more ought we to abstain from excess. 
John Chrysostom, Homily 17 on 1 Corinthians, Sec. 1.

{1 Cor 6:13}
 "Now the body is not for fornication, but for the Lord;" for it was not formed for this purpose, to live riotously and commit fornication, as neither was the belly to be greedy; but that it might follow Christ as a Head, and that the Lord might be set over the body. 
John Chrysostom, Homily 17 on 1 Corinthians, Sec. 1.

{1 Cor 6:13-14}
[5.]  "But," says one, "had I not received a mortal body, I had not sinned." Tell me then, had he a mortal body when he sinned? Surely not: for if it had been mortal before, it would not have undergone death as a punishment afterwards. And that a mortal body is no hindrance to virtue, but that it keeps men in order and is of the great service, is plain from what follows. If the expectation of immortality alone so lifted up Adam; had he been even immortal in reality, to what a pitch of arrogance would he not have proceeded? And as things are, after sinning you may do away with your sins, the body being abject, falling away, and subject to dissolution: for these thoughts are sufficient to sober a man. But if you had sinned in an immortal body, your sins were likely to have been more lasting. 
Mortality then is not the cause of sin: accuse it not: but the wicked will is the root of all the mischief. For why was not Abel at all the worse for his body? Why are the devils not at all the better for being incorporeal? Will you hear why the body's becoming mortal, so far from hurting, has been positively useful? Mark how much you gain thereby, if you are sober. It drags you back and pulls you off from wickedness, by griefs and pains and labors and other such things. "But it tempts men to uncleanness," perhaps you will say. Not the body, but incontinence, does this. 
John Chrysostom, Homily 17 on 1 Corinthians, Sec. 5.


{1 Cor 6:15}
[1] 6:15: "Know you not that your bodies are members of Christ? Shall I then take away the members of Christ, and make them members of a harlot? God forbid. 
HAVING passed on from the fornicator to the covetous person, he comes back to the former from the latter, no longer henceforth discoursing with him but with the others who had not committed fornication. ... For he that has committed sin, though you direct your words to another, is stung even in that way; his conscience being thoroughly awakened and scourging him. 
... "Know you not that your bodies are members of Christ?" thenceforth speaking as to children of noble birth. For whereas he had said, "Now the body is for the Lord," he indicates it more plainly now. ... But here he has employed it to startle and fill them with alarm. "Shall I then take the members of Christ, and make them members of a harlot? God forbid." Nothing can be more apt to strike horror than this expression. He said not, "Shall I take the members of Christ, and join them on to a harlot?" but what? "make them members of a harlot;" which surely would strike more keenly. Then he makes out how the fornicator becomes this, saying thus, "Know you not that he that is joined to a harlot is one body?" How is this evident? "For the twain, says He, shall become one." 
John Chrysostom, Homily 18 on 1 Corinthians, Sec. 1.

{1 Cor 6:18}
[2.] Verse 18. "Flee fornication." 
He said not, "abstain from fornication," but "Flee:" that is, with all zeal make to yourselves deliverance from that evil. "Every sin that a man dos is without the body; but he that commits fornication sins against his own body." ... "What then," say you, "does not the murderer stain his hand? What, of the covetous person and the extortioner?" I suppose it is plain to everyone. But since it was not possible to mention anything worse than the fornicator, he amplifies the crime in another way, by saying that in the fornicator the entire body becomes defiled. For it is as polluted as if it had fallen into a vessel of filth, and been immersed in defilement. And this too is our way. For from covetousness and extortion no one would make haste to go into a bath, but as if nothing had happened returns to his house. Whereas from intercourse with a harlot, as having become altogether unclean, he goes to a bath. To such a degree does the conscience retain from this sin a kind of sense of unusual shame. 
John Chrysostom, Homily 18 on 1 Corinthians, Sec. 2.

{1 Cor 6:19}
[3.] Verse 19. "Know you not that your body is a temple of the Holy Ghost which is in you?" 
He did not merely say, "of the Spirit," but, "which is in you;" which was the part of one who also was soothing. And again, explaining himself still further, he added, "which you have from God." ... "And you are not you own." This is not only to abash, but even to force men towards virtue. "For why," says he; "do you what you will? you are not your own master." But these things he said, not to take away free-will. For so in saying, "All things are lawful for me, but not all things are beneficial," he does not take away our liberty. And here again, writing, "You are not your own;" he makes no infringement upon freedom of choice, but he leads away from vice.  
John Chrysostom, Homily 18 on 1 Corinthians, Sec. 3.

{1 Cor 6:20}
"You were bought with a price." 
Why say you this? Surely on another ground, one might say perhaps, you should have persuaded men, pointing out that "we have a Master." But this is common to the Greeks also together with us: whereas the expression, "You were bought with a price," belongs to us peculiarly. For he reminds us of the greatness of the benefit and of the mode of our salvation, signifying that when we were alienated, we were "bought:" and not simply "bought," but, "with a price." ... "You are members of Christ," says he, "you are a temple of the Spirit." Become not then "members of a harlot:" for it is not your body which is insulted; since it is not your body at all, but Christ's. And these things he spoke, both to make manifests His loving-kindness in that our body is His, and to withdraw us from all evil license. For if the body be another's, "you have no authority," says he, "to insult another's body; and especially when it is the Lord's; nor yet to pollute a temple of the Spirit." For if anyone who invades a private house and makes his way reveling into it, must answer for it most severely; think what dreadful things he shall endure who makes a temple of the King a robber's lurking place. 
...
For supposing you had a daughter, and in extreme madness had let her out to a procurer for hire, and made her live a harlot's life, and then a king's son were to pass by, and free her from that slavery, and join her in marriage to himself; you could have no power thenceforth to bring her into the brothel. For you gave her up once for all, and sold her. Such as this is our case also. We let out our own flesh for hire to the Devil, that grievous procurer: Christ saw and set it free, and withdrew it from that evil tyranny; it is not then ours any more but His who delivered it. If you be willing to use it as a King's bride, there is none to hinder; but if you bring it where it was before, you will suffer just what they ought who are guilty of such outrages. 
John Chrysostom, Homily 18 on 1 Corinthians, Sec. 3.
   
   {1 Cor 6:16-17}
[4.] Wherefore he says, "He that is joined to a harlot is one body; but he that is joined to the Lord is one spirit." For such a one becomes thenceforth spirit, although a body envelope him. For when nothing corporeal nor gross nor earthly is around him, the body does but merely envelope him; since the whole government of him is in the soul and the Spirit. 
    John Chrysostom, Homily 18 on 1 Corinthians, Sec. 4.
{Barnabas}
I then, not as your teacher, but as one of yourselves, will set forth a few things by which in present circumstances ye may be rendered the more joyful.    Barnabas 4913

{Isa 1:14; Ps 51:17}
Incense is a vain abomination unto Me, and your new moons and sabbaths I cannot endure."  He has therefore abolished these things, that the new law of our Lord Jesus Christ, which is without the yoke of necessity, might have a human oblation.    ... To us, then, He declares, "A sacrifice [pleasing] to God is a broken spirit; a smell of sweet savour to the Lord is a heart that glorifieth Him that made it."    Barnabas 4927
Barnabas, ch. 2

{1 Cor 10:12; Eternal Security}
We ought therefore, brethren, carefully to inquire concerning our salvation, lest the wicked one, having made his entrance by deceit, should hurl us forth from our [true] life.    Barnabas 4928
Barnabas, ch. 2

{Introduction to Romans; Introduction to Galatians; Acts 15:5}
take heed now to yourselves, and not to be like some, adding largely to your sins, and saying, "The covenant is both theirs and ours."    Barnabas 4952
Barnabas, ch. 4

{Heb 10:25}
Do not, by retiring apart, live a solitary life, as if you were already [fully] justified; but coming together in one place, make common inquiry concerning what tends to your general welfare.    Barnabas 4962
Barnabas, ch. 4

{Mt 20:16; 22:14; Eternal Security}
Let us beware lest we be found [fulfilling that saying], as it is written, "Many are called, but few are chosen."     Barnabas 4969
Barnabas, ch. 4

{Rom 5:9; Eph 1:7}
For to this end the Lord endured to deliver up His flesh to corruption, that we might be sanctified through the remission of sins, which is effected by His blood of sprinkling.   Barnabas 4972

{Lk 5:8}
But when He chose His own apostles who were to preach His Gospel, [He did so from among those] who were sinners above all sin, that He might show He came "not to call the righteous, but sinners to repentance."    Barnabas 4984
Barnabas, ch. 5

{Isa 3:10 (LXX)}    
For the prophet speaks against Israel, "Woe to their soul, because they have counselled an evil counsel against themselves, saying, Let us bind the just one, because he is displeasing to us."  Barnabas 5003
Barnabas, ch. 6
{1 Cor 3:16}
For, my brethren, the habitation of our heart is a holy temple to the Lord. For again saith the Lord,    Barnabas 5017

{Ex 33:3; Millennium; Rev 20:4}
What, then, mean milk and honey? This, that as the infant is kept alive first by honey, and then by milk, so also we, being quickened and kept alive by the faith of the promise and by the word, shall live ruling over the earth.    Barnabas 5020
Barnabas, ch. 6

{Gen 22:9}
in order that the type established in Isaac when he was offered upon the altar might be fully accomplished.    Barnabas 5031
Barnabas, ch. 7

{Lev 16:7-10}
take one as a burnt-offering for sins. And what should they do with the other? "Accursed," says He, "is the one." Mark how the type of Jesus now comes out. "And all of you spit upon it, and pierce it, and encircle its head with scarlet wool, and thus let it be driven into the wilderness." 
...
 And when all this has been done, he who bears the goat brings it into the desert, and takes the wool off from it, and places that upon a shrub which is called Rachia, of which also we are accustomed to eat the fruits when we find them in the field. Of this kind of shrub alone the fruits are sweet. Why then, again, is this? Give good heed. [You see] "one upon the altar, and the other accursed;" and why [do you behold] the one that is accursed crowned?    Barnabas 5036

{Num 19:2-6}
Israel, that men of the greatest wickedness should offer a heifer, and slay and burn it, and, that then boys should take the ashes, and put these into vessels, and bind round a stick purple wool along with hyssop, and that thus the boys should sprinkle the people, one by one, in order that they might be purified from their sins? Consider how He speaks to you with simplicity. The calf is Jesus: the sinful men offering it are those who led Him to the slaughter. But now the men are no longer guilty, are no longer regarded as sinners. And the boys that sprinkle are those that have proclaimed to us the remission of sins and purification of heart.    Barnabas 5050
Barnabas, ch. 8

{Num 19:6}
But why was hyssop joined with the wool? Because in His kingdom the days will be evil and polluted in which we shall be saved, [and] because he who suffers in body is cured through the cleansing efficacy of hyssop.    Barnabas 5057
Barnabas, ch. 8

{2 Cor 3:14}
And on this account the things which stand thus are clear to us, but obscure to them because they did not hear the voice of the Lord.    Barnabas 5058
Barnabas, ch. 8

{Deut 10:16; Circumcision}
But thou wilt say, "Yea, verily the people are circumcised for a seal." But so also is every Syrian and Arab, and all the priests of idols: are these then also within the bond of His covenant?    Barnabas 5070
. . .
Yea, the Egyptians also practise circumcision.    Barnabas 5072
Barnabas, ch. 9

{Gen 17:23}
"And Abraham circumcised ten, and eight, and three hundred men of his household." The ten and the eight are thus denoted-Ten by I, and Eight by E. You have [the initials of the, name of] Jesus. And because the cross was to express the grace [of our redemption] by the letter T, he says also, "Three Hundred." He signifies, therefore, Jesus by two letters, and the cross by one.    Barnabas 5075
Barnabas, ch. 9

{Lev 11:7-16; Deut 14:8-15}
"Thou shalt not eat the swine, nor the eagle, nor the hawk, nor the raven, nor any fish which is not possessed of scales?" ... Is there then not a command of God they should not eat [these things]? There is, but Moses spoke with a spiritual reference. For this reason he named the swine, as much as to say, "Thou shalt not join thyself to men who resemble swine." For when they live in pleasure, they forget their Lord;    Barnabas 5080, 5082
Barnabas, ch. 10

{Lev 11:13-16; Deut 14:7-15}
"The eagle, nor the hawk, nor the kite, nor the raven." ... "Thou shalt not join thyself," he means, "to such men as know not how to procure food for themselves by labour and sweat, but seize on that of others in their iniquity, and although wearing an aspect of simplicity, are on the watch to plunder others."    Barnabas 5086
Barnabas, ch. 10

{Lev 11:9-12; Deut 14:9-10}
"And thou shalt not eat," he says, "the lamprey, or the polypus, or the cuttlefish." ...In like manner as those fishes, above accursed, float in the deep, not swimming [on the surface] like the rest, but make their abode in the mud which lies at the bottom.    Barnabas 5090
Barnabas, ch. 10

{Lev 11:6; Deut 14:7}
"Thou shall not," he says, "eat the hare." ... Wherefore? "Thou shall not be a corrupter of boys, nor like unto such." Because the hare multiplies, year by year, the places of its conception;    Barnabas 5092
...
Moreover, "Thou shall not eat the hyena." He means, "Thou shall not be an adulterer, nor a corrupter, nor be like to them that are such." Wherefore? Because that animal annually changes its sex, and is at one time male, and at another female. Moreover, he has rightly detested the weasel.    Barnabas 5093
Barnabas, ch. 10

{Lev 11:3}
"Ye shall eat every animal that is cloven-footed and ruminant." What does he mean? [The ruminant animal denotes him] who, on receiving food, recognizes Him that nourishes him, and being satisfied by Him, is visibly made glad.    Barnabas 5102
. . .
meditation is a work of gladness, and who ruminate upon the word of the Lord. But what means the cloven-footed? That the righteous man also walks in this world, yet looks forward to the holy state [to come]. Behold how well Moses legislated.    Barnabas 5105
Barnabas, ch. 10

{Jer 2:13; Acts 2:38}
Concerning the water, indeed, it is written, in reference to the Israelites, that they should not receive that baptism which leads to the remission of sins, but should procure another for themselves.    Barnabas 5111
. . .
because this people hath committed two great evils: they have forsaken Me, a living fountain, and have hewn out for themselves broken cisterns.    Barnabas 5113
Barnabas, ch. 11

{Isa 33:16-17; Acts 2:38}
Furthermore, what saith He in reference to the Son? "His water is sure; ye shall see the King in His glory, and your soul shall meditate on the fear of the Lord." 
   Barnabas 5117
. . .
Mark how He has described at once both the water and the cross. For these words imply, Blessed are they who, placing their trust in the cross, have gone down into the water; for, says He, they shall receive their reward in due time: then He declares, I will recompense them.   Barnabas 5122
Barnabas, ch. 11

{Ezek 47:12; Acts 2:38; 1 Pet 3:21}
"And there was a river flowing on the right, and from it arose beautiful trees; and whosoever shall eat of them shall live forever." This meaneth, that we indeed descend into the water full of sins and defilement, but come up, bearing fruit in our heart, having the fear [of God] and trust in Jesus in our spirit.    Barnabas 5126
Barnabas, ch. 11

{Gen 25:23}
"but the elder shall serve the younger: yet he also shall be blessed." ... But let us see if this people [the Gentiles] is the heir, or the former [the Jews], and if the testament belongs to us or to them. Hear what the Scripture says concerning the people. Isaac prayed for Rebecca his wife because she was barren; and she conceived. Furthermore also, Rebeca went forth to inquire of the Lord; and the Lord said to her, "Two nations are in your womb, and two people in your belly; and the one people shall surpass the other, and the elder shall serve the younger."
Barnabas, ch. 13

{Gen 48:19}
And in another prophecy Jacob speaks more clearly to his son Joseph, saying, . . .And he brought Manasseh and Ephraim, desiring that Manasseh should be blessed, because he was the elder. With this view Joseph led him to the right hand of his father Jacob. But Jacob saw in spirit the type of the people to arise afterwards. And Jacob saw in spirit the type of the people to arise afterwards. And what says [the Scripture]? And Jacob changed the direction of his hands, and laid his right hand upon the head of Ephraim, the second and younger, and blessed him. . ..
Ye see on whom he laid [his hands], that this people should be first, and heir of the covenant. 
Barnabas, ch. 13

{Gen 15:6; Gen 17:5,6}
If then, still further, the same thing was intimated through Abraham, we reach the perfection of our knowledge. What, then, says He to Abraham? "Because thou hast believed, it is imputed to thee for righteousness: behold, I have made thee the father of those nations who believe in the Lord while in [a state of] uncircumcision."    Barnabas 5165
Barnabas, ch. 13

{Gen 1:31; Gen 2:1,2; 2 Pet 3:8}
Attend, my children, to the meaning of this expression, "He finished in six days." This implies that the Lord will finish all things in six thousand years, for a day is with Him a thousand years.    Barnabas 5193
Barnabas, ch. 15

{Gen 2:2,3}
rested on the seventh day." This means: when His Son, coming [again], shall destroy the time of the wicked man, and judge the ungodly, and change the-sun, and the moon, and the stars, then shall He truly rest on the seventh day.    Barnabas 5196
Barnabas, ch. 15

{Isa 1:13; Eighth Day; Lk 24:1; Jn 20:1; Acts 20:7; Sabbath}
Your present Sabbaths are not acceptable to Me, but that is which I have made, [namely this,] when, giving rest to all things, I shall make a beginning of the eighth day, that is, a beginning of another world. Wherefore, also, we keep the eighth day with joyfulness, the day also on which Jesus rose again from the dead.    Barnabas 5201
Barnabas, ch. 15

{Mt 7:13,14}
There are two ways of doctrine and authority, the one of light, and the other of darkness.   Barnabas 5230
. . .
great difference between these two ways. For over one are stationed the light-bringing angels of God, but over the other the angels of Satan.    Barnabas 5230
Barnabas, ch. 18

{Rom 2:6-16; Jas 2:20-26}
The way of light, then, is as follows. If anyone desires to travel to the appointed place, he must be zealous in his works.    Barnabas 5234
Barnabas, ch. 19

{Ex 21:22-25; Abortion}
"If men fight, and hurt a woman with child, so that she gives birth prematurely, yet no harm follows, he shall surely be punished accordingly as the woman's husband imposes on him; and he shall pay as the judges determine.23 But if any harm follows, then you shall give life for life,24 eye for eye, tooth for tooth, hand for hand, foot for foot,25 burn for burn, wound for wound, stripe for stripe.
Barnabas, ch. 19
. . .
Thou shalt not slay the child by procuring abortion; nor, again, shalt thou destroy it after it is born.    Barnabas 5243
Barnabas, ch. 19

{Matt 5:42}
"Give to him who asks you, and from him who wants to borrow from you do not turn away." ... 
Thou shalt communicate in all things with thy neighbour; thou shalt not call things thine own; for if ye are partakers in common of things which are incorruptible, how much more [should you be] of those things which are corruptible!    Barnabas 5249
. . .
Do not be ready to stretch forth thy hands to take, whilst thou contractest them to give.    Barnabas 5252
. . .
Thou shalt love, as the apple of thine eye, every one that speaketh to thee the word of the Lord. Thou shalt remember the day of judgment, night and day. Thou shalt seek out every day the faces of the saints, either by word examining them, and going to exhort them, and meditating how to save a soul by the word, or by thy hands thou shalt labour for the redemption of thy sins. Thou shalt not hesitate to give, nor murmur when thou givest. "Give to every one that asketh thee," and thou shalt know who is the good Recompenser of the reward. Thou shalt preserve what thou hast received [in charge], neither adding to it nor taking from it.    Barnabas 5252
Barnabas, ch. 19

{Heb 10:24-25}
Thou shalt seek out every day the faces of the saints, either by word examining them, and going to exhort them, and meditating how to save a soul by the word, or by thy hands thou shalt labour for the redemption of thy sins.  Barnabas 5252
Barnabas, ch. 19

{Mt 5:9; Mt 7:13-14}
"Blessed are the peacemakers, For they shall be called sons of God." ...To the last thou shalt hate the wicked [one]. Thou shalt judge righteously. Thou shalt not make a schism, but thou shalt pacify those that contend by bringing them together. Thou shalt confess thy sins. Thou shalt not go to prayer with an evil conscience. This is the way of light.    Barnabas 5257
Barnabas, ch. 19

{Mt 5:42; Jas 5:1-6}
"Give to him who asks you, and from him who wants to borrow from you do not turn away." ... who turn away him that is in want, who oppress the afflicted, who are advocates of the rich, who are unjust judges of the poor, and who are in every respect transgressors.    Barnabas 5267
Barnabas, ch. 20

{Rev 20:12-13; Rom 2:6-11}
It is well, therefore, that he who has learned the judgments of the Lord, as many as have been written, should walk in them. For he who keeps these shall be glorified in the kingdom of God; but he who chooses other things shall be destroyed with his works. On this account there will be a resurrection, on this account a retribution.    Barnabas 5269
Barnabas, ch. 21

{Jn 1:18}
the evangelist John sufficiently shows, when he thus writes concerning Him: "The only-begotten Son, who is in the bosom of the Father." For since that divine teacher intended to show that the Father and the Son are two things inseparable the one from the other, he spoke of Him as being in the bosom of the Father.    location 116452   
Alexander of Alexandria, Letters on the Arian Heresy, Letter I.

{Jn 1:1-3}
Now that also the Word of God is not comprehended in the number of things that were created "from things which are not," the same John says, "All things were made by Him."    location 116454   
Alexander of Alexandria, Letters on the Arian Heresy, Letter I.

{Jn 1:18}
the most pious John contemplated the essence of the divine Word at a very great distance, and as placed beyond all conception of those things that are begotten, he thought it not meet to speak of His generation and creation; not daring to designate the Creator in the same terms as the things that are made. Not that the Word is unbegotten, for the Father alone is unbegotten, but because the inexplicable subsistence of the only-begotten Son transcends the acute comprehension of the evangelists, and perhaps also of angels.    location 116463   
Alexander of Alexandria, Letters on the Arian Heresy, Letter I.

{Sir 3:22; Deut 29:29}
who presumes to inquire into anything beyond these things, not listening to this saying: "Seek not out the things that are too hard for thee, neither search the things that are above thy strength."    location 116467   
Alexander of Alexandria, Letters on the Arian Heresy, Letter I.

{Isa 53:8}
How shall anyone be able to investigate too curiously the subsistence of the divine Word, unless he be smitten with frenzy? Concerning which the Spirit of prophecy says, "Who shall declare his generation?"    location 116472   
Alexander of Alexandria, Letters on the Arian Heresy, Letter I.

{Mt 11:27}
saying that to comprehend this was quite beyond their nature, and that to the Father alone belonged the knowledge of this most divine mystery. "For no man," says He, "knoweth the Son, but the Father: neither knoweth any man the Father, save the Son."    location 116474   
Alexander of Alexandria, Letters on the Arian Heresy, Letter I.
{Arianism}
For according to them, the space of time in which they [the Arians] say that the Son had not yet been made by the Father, preceded the wisdom of God that fashioned all things,    location 116483  
Alexander of Alexandria, Letters on the Arian Heresy, Letter I.

{Prov 8:30 [LXX]}
it is necessary to say that the Father is always the Father. But He is the Father, since the Son is always with Him, on account of whom He is called the Father. Wherefore, since the Son is always with Him, the Father is always perfect, being destitute of nothing as regards good; who, not in time, nor after an interval, nor from things which are not, hath begotten His only-begotten Son. How, then, is it not impious to say, that the wisdom of God once was not which speaks thus concerning itself: "I was with Him forming all things; I was His delight;"    location 116488   
Alexander of Alexandria, Letters on the Arian Heresy, Letter I.

{Arianism; Heb 1:3}
For he who denies that the brightness of the glory existed, takes away also the primitive light of which it is the brightness.    location 116493   
Alexander of Alexandria, Letters on the Arian Heresy, Letter I.

{Rom 8:32}
8. And His proper and peculiar, natural and excellent Sonship, St. Paul has declared, who thus speaks of God: "Who spared not His own Son, but for us," who were not His natural sons, "delivered Him up."    location 116508   
Alexander of Alexandria, Letters on the Arian Heresy, Letter I, ch.8.

{Ps 2:7}
Moreover, in the Psalms the Saviour says: "The Lord hath said unto Me, Thou art my Son." Where, showing that He is the true and genuine Son, He signifies that there are no other genuine sons besides Himself.    location 116511   
Alexander of Alexandria, Letters on the Arian Heresy, Letter I.

{Ps 110:3}
And what, too, is the meaning of this: "From the womb before the morning I begat thee"? Does He not plainly indicate the natural sonship of paternal bringing forth,    location 116512   
Alexander of Alexandria, Letters on the Arian Heresy, Letter I.

{Gen 6:2}
but the adoption of rational sons belongs not to them by nature, but is prepared for them by the probity of their life, and by the free gift of God. And it is mutable as the Scripture recognises: "For when the sons of God saw the daughters of men, they took them wives,"    location 116515   
Alexander of Alexandria, Letters on the Arian Heresy, Letter I.

{Jn 10:30; Jn 14:8-9}
words which signify His natural glory and nobility, and abiding with the Father, they have become unmindful. Such as this: "I and My Father are one," which indeed the Lord says, not as proclaiming Himself to be the Father, nor to demonstrate that two persons are one; but that the Son of the Father most exactly preserves the expressed likeness of the Father, inasmuch as He has by nature impressed upon Him His similitude in every respect, and is the image of the Father in no way discrepant, and the expressed figure of the primitive exemplar. Whence, also, to Philip, who then was desirous to see Him, the Lord shows this abundantly. For when he said, "Show us the Father," He answered: "He that hath seen Me, hath seen the Father," since the Father was Himself seen through the spotless and living mirror of the divine image.    location 116528   
Alexander of Alexandria, Letters on the Arian Heresy, Letter I.

{Ps 36:9}
Similar to which is what the saints say in the Psalms: "In Thy light shall we see light."    location 116534   
Alexander of Alexandria, Letters on the Arian Heresy, Letter I.

{1 Jn 5:1}
For they [the Arians] ignorantly affirm that one of two things must necessarily be said, either that He is from things which are not, or that there are two unbegottens; nor do those ignorant men know how great is the difference between the unbegotten Father, and the things which were by Him created from things which are not, as well the rational as the irrational. Between which two, as holding the middle place, the only begotten nature of God, the Word by which the Father formed all things out of nothing, was begotten of the true Father Himself. As in a certain place the Lord Himself testified, saying, "Every one that loveth Him that begat, loveth Him also that is begotten of Him."    location 116549   
Alexander of Alexandria, Letters on the Arian Heresy, Letter I.

{Modalism; Isa 53:8}
12. Concerning whom we thus believe, even as the Apostolic Church believes. In one Father unbegotten, who has from no one the cause of His being, who is unchangeable and immutable, who is always the same, and admits of no increase or diminution; who gave to us the Law, the prophets, and the Gospels; who is Lord of the patriarchs and apostles, and all the saints. And in one Lord Jesus Christ, the only-begotten Son of God; not begotten of things which are not, but of Him who is the Father; not in a corporeal manner, by excision or division as Sabellius and Valentinus thought, but in a certain inexplicable and unspeakable manner, according to the words of the prophet cited above: "Who shall declare His generation?" Since that His subsistence no nature which is begotten can investigate, even as the Father can be investigated by none; because that the nature of rational beings cannot receive the knowledge of His divine generation by the Father.    location 116554   
Alexander of Alexandria, Letters on the Arian Heresy, Letter I, ch.12.

{Trinity; Ontological Equality}
That He is equally with the Father unchangeable and immutable, wanting in nothing, and the perfect Son, and like to the Father, we have learnt;    location 116562   
Alexander of Alexandria, Letters on the Arian Heresy, Letter I.

{Trinity; Economical Subordination; Col 1:15}
in this alone is He inferior to the Father, that He is not unbegotten. For He is the very exact image of the Father, and in nothing differing from Him.    location 116563   
Alexander of Alexandria, Letters on the Arian Heresy, Letter I.


{Jn 14:28; Heb 1:3}
For it is clear that He is the image fully containing all things by which the greatest similitude is declared, as the Lord Himself hath taught us, when He says, "My Father is greater than I." And according to this we believe that the Son is of the Father, always existing. "For He is the brightness of His glory, the express image of His Father's person." But let no one take that word always so as to raise suspicion that He is unbegotten,    location 116564   
Alexander of Alexandria, Letters on the Arian Heresy, Letter I.

{Col 1:17}
For neither are the words, "He was," or "always," or "before all worlds," equivalent to unbegotten.  ... but they have been employed by holy men, whilst each, according to his capacity, seeks to express this mystery, asking indulgence from the hearers, and pleading a reasonable excuse, in saying, Thus far have we attained.    location 116571   
Alexander of Alexandria, Letters on the Arian Heresy, Letter I.

{Trinity}
Therefore to the unbegotten Father, indeed, we ought to preserve His proper dignity, in confessing that no one is the cause of His being; but to the Son must be allotted His fitting honour, in assigning to Him, as we have said, a generation from the Father without beginning, and allotting adoration to Him,    location 116574   
Alexander of Alexandria, Letters on the Arian Heresy, Letter I.

{Jn 14:28}
But we must say that to the Father alone belongs the property of being unbegotten, for the Saviour Himself said, "My Father is greater than I."    location 116578   
Alexander of Alexandria, Letters on the Arian Heresy, Letter I.

{Trinity}
And besides the pious opinion concerning the Father and the Son, we confess to one Holy Spirit, as the divine Scriptures teach us; who hath inaugurated both the holy men of the Old Testament, and the divine teachers of that which is called the New. And besides, also, one only Catholic and Apostolic Church, which can never be destroyed, though all the world should seek to make war with it;    location 116579   
Alexander of Alexandria, Letters on the Arian Heresy, Letter I.


{Mother of God}
After this we know of the resurrection of the dead, the first-fruits of which was our Lord Jesus Christ, who in very deed, and not in appearance merely, carried a body, of Mary Mother of God, who in the end of the world came to the human race to put away sin, was crucified and died, and yet did He not thus perceive any detriment to His divinity, being raised from the dead, taken up into heaven, seated at the right hand of majesty.    location 116583   [Kinuko, if the expression above is not a later corruption, Alexander is the first Christian I know of to refer to Mary as "Mother of God."]
Alexander of Alexandria, Letters on the Arian Heresy, Letter I.

{Jude 3}
Thus do we teach, thus do we preach. These are the apostolic doctrines of the Church,    location 116588   
Alexander of Alexandria, Letters on the Arian Heresy, Letter I.

{Ps 45:1; Ps 110:3 [LXX]; Jn 14:9}
And how can He be made of things which are not, when the Father says, "My heart belched forth a good Word;" and, "From the womb, before the morning have I begotten Thee?" Or how is He unlike to the substance of the Father, who is the perfect image and brightness of the Father, and who says, "He that hath seen Me hath seen the Father?" And how, if the Son is the Word or Wisdom and Reason of God, was there a time when He was not?    location 116642   
Alexander of Alexandria, Letters on the Arian Heresy, Letter II.

{Jn 1:14; Mt 1:18; Lk 1:35}
Therefore God sent down from heaven His incorporeal Son to take flesh upon Him in the virgin's womb; and thus, equally as thou, was He made man; to save lost man, and collect all His scattered members. For Christ, when He joined the manhood to His person, united that which death by the separation of the body had dispersed.    location 116786   
Alexander of Alexandria, Letters on the Arian Heresy, Letter V.

{Isa 42:14}
It is sufficiently discovered that He suffered shame for man's sake, to set him free from death; and that He exclaimed, as in the words of the prophet, "I have endured as a travailing woman."    location 116793   
Alexander of Alexandria, Letters on the Arian Heresy, Letter V.

{Jon 2:4}
For thus He says Himself by the prophet: "I went down into the deep."    location 116795   
Alexander of Alexandria, Letters on the Arian Heresy, Letter V.

{Jn 6:35}
they fed Him with gall who hath offered to them the Bread of Life;    location 116800   
Alexander of Alexandria, Letters on the Arian Heresy, Letter V.

{Mt 27:51-53}
6. For when our Lord was suffering upon the cross, the tombs were burst open, the infernal region was disclosed, the souls leapt forth, the dead returned to life, and many of them were seen in Jerusalem, whilst the mystery of the cross was being perfected; what time our Lord trampled upon death, dissolved the enmity, bound the strong man, and raised the trophy of the cross, His body being lifted up upon it, that the body might appear on high, and death to be depressed under the foot of flesh.    location 116803   
Alexander of Alexandria, Letters on the Arian Heresy, Letter V, ch.6.

{Hades}
Meanwhile Hades was with light resplendent, for thither had the star descended. The Lord, indeed, did not descend into Hades in His body but in His spirit [soul??].    location 116811   
Alexander of Alexandria, Letters on the Arian Heresy, Letter V.

{Hades; Mt 27:52}
For when the body of the Lord was hung upon the cross, the tombs, as we have said, were opened; Hades was unbarred. the dead received their life, the souls were sent back again into the world, and that because the Lord had conquered Hades, had trodden down death, had covered the enemy with shame; therefore was it that the souls came forth from Hades, and the dead appeared upon the earth.    location 116813   
Alexander of Alexandria, Letters on the Arian Heresy, Letter V.

{Jn 6:35; Lk 23:33-34; Gal 3:13-14; Mt 27:52}
He was stretched upon the cross who stretched out the heavens; He was fed with gall who gave the manna to be bread; He died who gives life. He was given up to the tomb who raises the dead.    location 116839   
Alexander of Alexandria, Letters on the Arian Heresy, Letter V.


{Aristides; Hadrian}
Here follows the defence which Aristides the philosopher made before Hadrian the King on behalf of reverence for God.    location 175667   

{Gen 2:19; Jn 4:24; Heb 11:3; Deut 4:12; Jn 5:37}
He has no name, for everything which has a name is kindred to things created. Form he has none, nor yet any union of members;    location 175680   
Aristides, Apology, Ch. 1

{1 Kings 8:27; Job 37:23}
He is neither male nor female. The heavens do not limit him, but the heavens and all things, visible and invisible, receive their bounds from him. Adversary he has none, for there exists not any stronger than he.    location 175682   
Aristides, Apology, Ch. 1

{Mt 9:13; Hos 6:6}
He requires not sacrifice and libation,    location 175685   
Aristides, Apology, Ch. 1

{Rom 1:14-16; Rom 2:9-10; Ancient World}
there are four classes of men in this world:-barbarians and Greeks, Jews and Christians.    location 175688   
Aristides, Apology, Ch. 2

{Divinity of Christ; Christ: God and Man; Lk 1:32,35; Jn 1:14; 1 Tim 3:16; Jn 1:1}
The Christians, then, trace the beginning of their religion from Jesus the Messiah; and he is named the Son of God Most High. And it is said that God came down from heaven, and from a Hebrew virgin assumed and clothed himself with flesh; and the Son of God lived in a daughter of man.    location 175694   
Aristides, Apology, Ch. 2

{Twelve Apostles; Mt 28:19-20; Mk 16:20}
Thereupon these twelve disciples went forth throughout the known parts of the world, and kept showing his greatness with all modesty and uprightness.    location 175699   
Aristides, Apology, Ch. 2

{Pagan Religion}
If it be, then, that their gods are too feeble to see to their own safety, how will they take thought for the safety of men? Great then is the error into which the barbarians wandered in worshipping lifeless images which can do nothing to help them.    location 175709   
Aristides, Apology, Ch. 3

{Gen 1:14-19; Jer 31:35; Deut 4:19; Ps 19:1-6; Ps 104:19-20; Ps 136:7-9; Ps 74:16; Ps 8:3; Ps 148:3; Neh 9:6}
So also they erred who believed that the sun is a god. For we see that it is moved by the compulsion of another, and revolves and makes its journey, and proceeds from sign to sign, rising and setting every day, so as to give warmth for the growth of plants and trees, and to bring forth into the air where with it (sunlight) is mingled every growing thing which is upon the earth. And to it there belongs by comparison a part in common with the rest of the stars in its course;  ... and that not according to its own will but rather according to the will of him who rules it. And hence it is impossible that the sun should be a god, but the work of God;    location 175745   
Aristides, Apology, Ch. 6

{Pagan Religion} 
The Greeks, then, because they are more subtle than the barbarians, have gone further astray than the barbarians; inasmuch as they have introduced many fictitious gods, and have set up some of them as males and some as females; and in that some of their gods were found who were adulterers, and did murder, and were deluded, and envious, and wrathful and passionate, and parricides, and thieves, and robbers.    location 175756   
Aristides, Apology, Ch.8

{Gen 6:1-4}
And they say of their gods that they committed adultery with the daughters of men; and of these there was born a certain race which also was mortal.    location 175763   
Aristides, Apology, Ch.8

{Pagan Religion} 
Thus, O King, have the Greeks put forward foulness, and absurdity, and folly about their gods    location 175765   
Aristides, Apology, Ch.8

{Rom 1:29-31; Pagan Religion}
mankind have received incitements to commit adultery and fornication, and to steal and to practise all that is offensive and hated    location 175767   
Aristides, Apology, Ch.8

{Lev 18:21; Lev 20:2-5; Deut 12:31; Deut 18:10}
First of all, the Greeks bring forward as a god Kronos, that is to say Chiun (Saturn). And his worshippers sacrifice their children to him, and they burn some of them alive in his honour.    location 175772   
Aristides, Apology, Ch.8

{Rom 1:22-23; Pagan Religion; Egyptians}
The Egyptians, moreover, because they are more base and stupid than every people that is on the earth, have themselves erred more than all. For the deities (or religion) of the barbarians and the Greeks did not suffice for them, but they introduced some also of the nature of the animals, and said thereof that they were gods, and likewise of creeping things which are found on the dry land and in the waters.    location 175835   
Aristides, Apology, Ch. 12

{Deut 6:4; Mk 12:29; Jn 17:3; 1 Cor 8:6; Gal 3:20; Eph 4:6; 1 Tim 1:17; 1 Tim 2:5; Jas 2:19}
even so also God is one in His nature. A single essence is proper to Him, since He is uniform in His nature and His essence;    location 175868   
Aristides, Apology, Ch. 12

{Rom 1:21-31; Ps 115:8; Pagan Religion}
Greeks made laws they did not perceive that by their laws they condemn their gods. For if their laws are righteous, their gods are unrighteous, since they transgressed the law in killing one another, and practicing sorcery, and committing adultery, and in robbing and stealing, and in lying with males, and by their other practices as well.    location 175875   
Aristides, Apology, Ch. 12

{Unbelieving Jews; Rom 3:1-2; Ex 22:22; Ex 23:6,11; Lev 19:10,15; Lev 23:22; Lev 25:25,35,39; Lev 25:47,48; Deut 10:18; Deut 14:28-29; Deut 15:4-11; Deut 24:14; Deut 24:17; Deut 24:19-21; Deut 27:19}
The Jews then say that God is one, the Creator of all, and omnipotent; and that it is not right that any other should be worshipped except this God alone. And herein they appear to approach the truth more than all the nations, especially in that they worship God and not His works. And they imitate God by the philanthropy which prevails among them; for they have compassion on the poor, and they release the captives, and bury the dead, and do such things as these, which are acceptable before God and well-pleasing also to men,-which (customs) they have received from their forefathers.    location 175883   
Aristides, Apology, Ch. 14

{Isa 1:11-14; Jer 6:20; Mal 1:10; Col 2:16-19}
whereas by their mode of observance it is to the angels and not to God that their service is rendered:-as when they celebrate sabbaths and the beginning of the months, and feasts of unleavened bread, and a great fast; and fasting and circumcision and the purification of meats, which things, however, they do not observe perfectly.    location 175888   
Aristides, Apology, Ch. 14

{Jn 14:6; Jn 8:32}
But the Christians, O King, while they went about and made search, have found the truth;    location 175891   

{Heb 10:16; 2 Cor 3:3; Gal 5:22,23; Eph 6:1-3; Mt 5:16; Rom 12:9-18; 1 Jn 5:21; 1 Cor 10:7}
from whom they received commandments which they engraved upon their minds and observe in hope and expectation of the world which is to come. Wherefore they do not commit adultery nor fornication, nor bear false witness, nor embezzle what is held in pledge, nor covet what is not theirs. They honour father and mother, and show kindness to those near to them; and whenever they are judges, they judge uprightly. They do not worship idols    location 175893   
Aristides, Apology, Ch. 15

{Acts 15:29; 1 Cor 10:19-20}
and of the food which is consecrated to idols they do not eat,    location 175897   
Aristides, Apology, Ch. 15

{1 Pet 1:15-16; 1 Cor 7:34-35; 1 Tim 2:9-10; 2 Cor 5:9-10; 2 Cor 7:1; Heb 4:13; Philemon 16; Eph 6:9}
their women, O King, are pure as virgins, and their daughters are modest; and their men keep themselves from every unlawful union and from all uncleanness, in the hope of a recompense to come in the other world. Further, if one or other of them have bondmen and bondwomen or children, through love towards them they persuade them to become Christians, and when they have done so, they call them brethren    location 175898   
Aristides, Apology, Ch. 15

{Jas 1:27}
and they deliver the orphan from him who treats him harshly.    location 175902   
Aristides, Apology, Ch. 15

{Heb 13:2; Mt 25:35; Rom 12:13; 1 Pet 4:9; Jn 1:13; Rom 12:10; 1 Thess 4:9; 2 Pet 1:7}
And when they see a stranger, they take him in to their homes and rejoice over him as a very brother; for they do not call them brethren after the flesh, but brethren after the spirit and in God.    location 175903   
Aristides, Apology, Ch. 15

{1 Jn 3:16-18; Rom 12:13; Rom 15:26; Acts 4:34}
And whenever one of their poor passes from the world, each one of them according to his ability gives heed to him and carefully sees to his burial.    location 175904   
Aristides, Apology, Ch. 15

{1 Cor 12:26,27; Mt 25:35,36; Heb 13:3; 2 Cor 8:2-4}
And if they hear that one of their number is imprisoned or afflicted on account of the name of their Messiah, all of them anxiously minister to his necessity, and if it is possible to redeem him they set him free.    location 175905   
Aristides, Apology, Ch. 15

{1 Jn 3:16-18]
and if they have no spare food, they fast two or three days in order to supply to the needy their lack of food.    location 175907   
Aristides, Apology, Ch. 15

{1 Thess 4:13-14}
And if any righteous man among them passes from the world, they rejoice and offer thanks to God; and they escort his body as if he were setting out from one place to another near.    location 175910   
Aristides, Apology, Ch. 15

{Innocence of children; Inherited Sin; Mt 18:2-4; Mt 19:14}
and if moreover it happen to die in childhood, they give thanks to God the more, as for one who has passed through the world without sins.    location 175912   
Aristides, Apology, Ch. 15

{Mt 6:1-4; 2 Pet 3:14; 1 Tim 6:14}
and they conceal their giving just as he who finds a treasure and conceals it. And they strive to be righteous as those who expect to behold their Messiah,    location 175919   
Aristides, Apology, Ch. 15

{1 Pet 2;9; 2 Cor 5:17; 1 Pet 1:3,23}
And verily, this is a new people,    location 175923   
Aristides, Apology, Ch. 15

{1 Tim 2:1; Mt 5:13}
And to me there is no doubt but that the earth abides through the supplication of the Christians.    location 175927   
Aristides, Apology, Ch. 16

{False Accusations against Christians; 1 Pet 4:3,4; Jn 3:20}
Now the Greeks, O King, as they follow base practices in intercourse with males, and a mother and a sister and a daughter, impute their monstrous impurity in turn to the Christians.    location 175933   
Aristides, Apology, Ch. 16

{1 Pet 3:16; 1 Pet 2:12; 1 Tim 1:13; Acts 2:38}
and when it happens that one of them has repented, he is ashamed before the Christians of the works which were done by him; and he makes confession to God, saying, "I did these things in ignorance." And he purifies his heart, and his sins are forgiven him, because he committed them in ignorance in the former time, when he used to blaspheme and speak evil of the true knowledge of the Christians.    location 175936
Aristides, Apology, Ch. 16


{Gal 2:5; Gal 5:9-10}
For the farmer could not properly cast the seed into the ground, unless he first extirpated the wild wood, and whatever would be hurtful to the good seed;   location 24839
Athenagoras, On the Resurrection of the Dead, Ch.1

{2 Tim 4:3-4; Mt 16:6-12}
Neither surely can he who wishes to teach the truth persuade any one by speaking about it, so long as there is a false opinion lurking in the mind of his hearers, and barring the entrance of his arguments.   location 24841
Athenagoras, On the Resurrection of the Dead, Ch.1

{Eph 4:18-19; Rom 1:21}
the most unaccountable thing of all being, that they are in this state of mind without having any ground whatsoever in the matters themselves for their disbelief, or finding it possible to assign any reasonable cause why they disbelieve or experience any perplexity.location 24846
Athenagoras, On the Resurrection of the Dead, Ch.1

Chapter II A Resurrection is Not Impossible   location 24849

{Jn 3:18-21; Rom 1:19-25; Rev 21:8}
to disbelieve things which are not deserving of disbelief, is the act of men who do not employ a sound judgment about the truth.   location 24852
Athenagoras, On the Resurrection of the Dead, Ch. 2

{Mt 22:29; 1 Cor 15:12-22}
This they will succeed in, if they are able to show that it is either impossible for God, or contrary to His will, to unite and gather together again bodies that are dead, or even entirely dissolved into their elements, so as to constitute the same persons. If they cannot do this, let them cease from this godless disbelief, and from this blasphemy against sacred things:   location 24857
Athenagoras, On the Resurrection of the Dead, Ch. 2

{Rom 4:17}
it is a greater thing to know beforehand that which has not yet come to pass; but, viewed relatively to the majesty and wisdom of God, both are according to nature, and it is equally easy to know beforehand things that have not yet come into existence, and to know things which have been dissolved.   location 24872
Athenagoras, On the Resurrection of the Dead, Ch. 2

{Heb 2:10; Ps 8:4; Job 7:16-18}
The argument from the cause will appear, if we consider whether man was made at random and in vain, or for some purpose;   location 25040
Athenagoras, On the Resurrection of the Dead, Ch. 12

{2 Cor 5:1-4}
a man makes a house for his own use, but for cattle and camels and other animals of which he has need he makes the shelter suitable for each of them; not for his own use, if we regard the appearance only, though for that, if we look at the end he has in view, but as regards the immediate object, from concern for those for whom he cares. He has children, too, not for his own use, nor for the sake of anything else belonging to him, but that those who spring from him may exist and continue as long as possible, thus by the succession of children and grandchildren comforting himself respecting the close of his own life, and hoping in this way to immortalize the mortal.   location 25046
Athenagoras, On the Resurrection of the Dead, Ch. 12

{Isa 40:12-26}
But God can neither have made man in vain, for He is wise, and no work of wisdom is in vain; nor for His own use, for He is in want of nothing. But to a Being absolutely in need of nothing, no one of His works can contribute anything to His own use.   location 25051
Athenagoras, On the Resurrection of the Dead, Ch. 12

{2 Cor 5:1; Resurrection of Children}
 the fallacy of this is very clearly shown, from the fact that, although all human beings who die rise again, yet not all who rise again are to be judged: for if only a just judgment were the cause of the resurrection, it would of course follow that those who had done neither evil nor good-namely, very young children-would not rise again; but seeing that all are to rise again, those who have died in infancy as well as others, they too justify our conclusion that the resurrection takes place not for the sake of the judgment as the primary reason, but in consequence of the purpose of God in forming men, and the nature of the beings so formed.   location 25095
Athenagoras, On the Resurrection of the Dead, Ch. 14

{1 Cor 15:40-49}
For if the whole nature of men in general is composed of an immortal soul and a body which was fitted to it in the creation, and if neither to the nature of the soul by itself, nor to the nature of the body separately, has God assigned such a creation or such a life and entire course of existence as this, but to men compounded of the two, in order that they may, when they have passed through their present existence, arrive at one common end, with the same elements of which they are composed at their birth and during life,   location 25104
Athenagoras, On the Resurrection of the Dead, Ch. 15

{1 Cor 15:40-49}
Man, therefore, who consists of the two parts, must continue forever. But it is impossible for him to continue unless he rise again. For if no resurrection were to take place, the nature of men as men would not continue. And if the nature of men does not continue, in vain has the soul been fitted to the need of the body and to its experiences; in vain has the body been fettered so that it cannot obtain what it longs for, obedient to the reins of the soul, and guided by it as with a bridle;   location 25122
Athenagoras, On the Resurrection of the Dead, Ch. 15

{1 Cor 15:40-49; 2 Cor 5:1-4}
men, in respect of the soul, have from their first origin an unchangeable continuance, but in respect of the body obtain immortality by means of change. This is what is meant by the doctrine of the resurrection; and, looking to this, we both await the dissolution of the body, as the sequel to a life of want and corruption, and after this we hope for a continuance with immortality, not putting either our death on a level with the death of the irrational animals, or the continuance of man with the continuance of immortals, lest we should unawares in this way put human nature and life on a level with things with which it is not proper to compare them.   location 25136
Athenagoras, On the Resurrection of the Dead, Ch. 16

{1 Thess 4:13-14; Acts 7:60}
those who sleep are subject to similar states, as regards at least the stillness and the absence of all sense of the present or the past, or rather of existence itself and their own life.   location 25145
Athenagoras, On the Resurrection of the Dead, Ch. 16

{Jn 5:28-29; 1 Cor 15:52; Mt 27:52}
for a time it is interrupted by the separation of the soul from the body.   location 25148
Athenagoras, On the Resurrection of the Dead, Ch. 16

{Rom 2:6; Rev 20:12-13; Rev 2:23}
God as judging men according as they have lived well or ill,   location 25171
Athenagoras, On the Resurrection of the Dead, Ch. 18

{Ps 37:1-40; Lk 16:25; Heb 11:32-40; Acts 14:22; Rev 7:14-17}
(for the award according to merit finds no place in the present existence, since many atheists and persons who practice every iniquity and wickedness live on to the last, unvisited by calamity, whilst, on the contrary, those who have manifestly lived an exemplary life in respect of every virtue, live in pain, in insult, in calumny and outrage, and suffering of all kinds)   location 25190
Athenagoras, On the Resurrection of the Dead, Ch. 18

{1 Cor 15:32}
that maxim, so dear to the intemperate and lewd, "Let us eat and drink, for to-morrow we die."   location 25210
Athenagoras, On the Resurrection of the Dead, Ch. 19

{Rom 2:6; Rev 20:12-13; Rev 2:23}
But if the Maker of men takes any concern about His own works, and the distinction is anywhere to be found between those who have lived well and ill, it must be either in the present life, while men are still living who have conducted themselves virtuously or viciously, or after death, when men are in a state of separation and dissolution. But according to neither of these suppositions can we find a just judgment taking place; for neither do the good in the present life obtain the rewards of virtue, nor yet do the bad receive the wages of vice.   location 25211
Athenagoras, On the Resurrection of the Dead, Ch. 19

{1 Cor 15:42-44; Ps 22:26; Ps 23:6; Ps 49:7-9; Eccl 12:7; Dan 12:2-3; Mt 25:46; 1 Cor 15:12-19}
For either death is the entire extinction of life, the soul being dissolved and corrupted along with the body, or the soul remains by itself, incapable of dissolution, of dispersion, of corruption, whilst the body is corrupted and dissolved,   location 25224
Athenagoras, On the Resurrection of the Dead, Ch. 20

{Jn 5:28-29; Rom 2:6-11; Rev 20:12-13; Rev 2:23}
Yet equity is wanting to the judgment, if the being is not preserved in existence who practiced righteousness or lawlessness: for that which practiced each of the things in life on which the judgment is passed was man, not soul by itself.   location 25231
Athenagoras, On the Resurrection of the Dead, Ch. 20

{Jn 5:28-29}
it is in the highest degree unjust and unworthy of the judgment of God to lay upon the soul alone the sins which spring from them, and the consequent punishments.   location 25257
Athenagoras, On the Resurrection of the Dead, Ch. 21

{Jn 5:28-29}
But the most irrational thing of all is this: to impose properly sanctioned laws on men, and then to assign to their souls alone the recompense of their lawful or unlawful deeds.   location 25274
Athenagoras, On the Resurrection of the Dead, Ch. 23

{1 Cor 6:18; Lk 20:34-38}
nor could the command, "Thou shalt not commit adultery," ever be properly addressed to souls, or even thought of in such a connection, since the difference of male and female does not exist in them, nor any aptitude for sexual intercourse,   location 25280
Athenagoras, On the Resurrection of the Dead, Ch. 23

{Ps 8:4; Rom 2:14-15; Eccl 12:13}
For do we not see that husbandmen have one end, and physicians another; and again, the things which spring out of the earth another, and the animals nourished upon it, and produced according to a certain natural series, another? If this is evident, and natural and artificial powers, and the actions arising from these, must by all means be accompanied by an end in accordance with nature, it is absolutely necessary that the end of men, since it is that of a peculiar nature, should be separated from community with the rest; for it is not lawful to suppose the same end for beings destitute of rational judgment, and of those whose actions are regulated by the innate law and reason, and who live an intelligent life and observe justice.   location 25298
Athenagoras, On the Resurrection of the Dead, Ch. 24

{Rev 7:15; Mt 27:52; Rev 22:12; Col 3:1-3; 1 Jn 3:2-3}
soul should obtain the same body is impossible in any other way, and possible only by the resurrection; for if this takes place, an end befitting the nature of men follows also. And we shall make no mistake in saying, that the final cause of an intelligent life and rational judgment, is to be occupied uninterruptedly with those objects to which the natural reason is chiefly and primarily adapted, and to delight unceasingly in the contemplation of Him who is, and of His decrees, notwithstanding that the majority of men, because they are affected too passionately and too violently by things below, pass through life without attaining this object. For the large number of those who fail of the end that belongs to them does not make void the common lot, since the examination relates to individuals, and the reward or punishment of lives ill or well spent is proportioned to the merit of each.   location 25317
Athenagoras, On the Resurrection of the Dead, Ch. 25

{Preface to 1 Timothy; Acts 16:1-2}
To the extraordinary qualities of this youth testimony is borne by Luke, who informs us, that he was well reported of by the brethren that were at Lystra and Iconium.    location 58432   
John Chrysostom, Homilies on First Timothy, Preface

{Preface to 1 Timothy; Phil 2:22; 1 Cor 4:17}
For he elsewhere says of Timothy, "You know the proof of him, that as a son with a father, he has served with me in the Gospel." [Philippians 2:22] And to the Corinthians again he writes: "I have sent unto you Timothy, who is my beloved son, and faithful in the Lord." [1 Corinthians 4:17]    location 58437   
John Chrysostom, Homilies on First Timothy, Preface

{1 Tim 3:2-4}
Therefore when the Apostle discourses of Bishops, among the many things he requires of them, he makes no particular mention of age. And if he speaks of a Bishop being the husband of one wife, and having his children in subjection [1 Timothy 3:2-4], this is not said, as if it were necessary he should have a wife and children; but that if any should happen from a secular life to be advanced to that office, they might be such as knew how to preside over their household and children, and all others committed to them.    location 58447   
John Chrysostom, Homilies on First Timothy, Preface

{Preface to 1 Timothy; 1 Tim 4:13-16}
3. But why, you will say, does he address an Epistle to a disciple already appointed to the office of a Teacher? Ought he not to have been made perfect for his office, before he was sent? Yes; but the instruction which he needed was not that which was suited to a disciple, but that which was proper for a Teacher.    location 58451   
John Chrysostom, Homilies on First Timothy, Preface

{Preface to 1 Timothy; 1 Tim 1:3}
You will perceive him therefore through the whole Epistle adapting his instructions to a Teacher. Thus at the very beginning he does not say, "Do not attend to those who teach otherwise, but, Charge them that they teach no other doctrine. [1 Timothy 1:3]    location 58453   
John Chrysostom, Homilies on First Timothy, Preface

{Preface to 1 Timothy; Preface to 1 Corinthians; Acts 19:23-41}
Ver. 3. As I besought you to abide still at Ephesus, when I went into Macedonia.  Paul had himself passed some time in that city. There was the temple of Diana, and there he had been exposed to those great sufferings. For after the assembly in the Theater had been dissolved, and he had called to him and exhorted the disciples, he found it necessary to sail away, though afterwards he returned to them. It were worth enquiry, whether he stationed Timothy there at that time.    location 58511   
John Chrysostom, Homily 1 on First Timothy.

{Titus 1:14}
Ver. 4. Neither give heed to fables and endless genealogies. By fables he does not mean the law; far from it; but inventions and forgeries and counterfeit doctrines. For, it seems, the Jews wasted their whole discourse on these unprofitable points. They numbered up their fathers and grandfathers, that they might have the reputation of historical knowledge and research.    location 58518   
John Chrysostom, Homily 1 on First Timothy

{Jn 5:39}
"Search the Scriptures, for in them you think you have eternal life." [John 5:39] The seeking there is meant of prayer and vehement desire, and He bids search the Scriptures, not to introduce the labors of questioning, but to end them,    location 58526
John Chrysostom, Homily 1 on First Timothy
   
{Rom 10:4}
1 Timothy 1:5-7 Now the end of the commandment is charity out of a pure heart, and of a good conscience, and of faith unfeigned: From which some having swerved have turned aside unto vain jangling; Desiring to be teachers of the law; understanding neither what they say, nor whereof they affirm.    location 58594   
As therefore when he says, Christ is the end of the Law [Romans 10:4], that is, its fulfillment, and this is connected with the former,    location 58603   
John Chrysostom, Homily 2  on First Timothy

{Deut 5:32; Deut 17:11; Josh 1:7; Josh 23:6; Prov 4:27}
Ver. 6. From which some having swerved have turned aside to vain jangling. He has well said, swerved, for it requires skill, to shoot straight and not beside the mark, to have the direction of the Spirit.    location 58610   
John Chrysostom, Homily 2  on First Timothy

{1 Tim 1:7}
Understanding neither what they say, nor whereof they affirm. Here he censures them, because they know not the end and aim of the Law, nor the period for which it was to have authority.    location 58615   
John Chrysostom, Homily 2  on First Timothy

{1 Tim 1:8}
Ver. 8, 9. "But we know that the Law is good, if a man use it lawfully. Knowing this, that the Law is not made for a righteous man." ...  
And another way may be named besides. What is it? That the law, if you use it aright, sends you to Christ. For since its aim is to justify man, and it fails to effect this, it remits us to Him who can do so.    location 58627   
John Chrysostom, Homily 2  on First Timothy

{Sir 11:4}
Boast not of your clothing and raiment. [Sirach 11:4] This was the advice given of old to the simple. Indeed the dancer, the harlot, the player, are arrayed in a gayer and more costly robe than you.    location 58678   
John Chrysostom, Homily 2  on First Timothy

{Sir 11:4; 1 Tim 2:9}
But your garments, you say, are in-wrought with gold! And what is that to you? He that wrought it, not he that wears it, is the object of admiration, for there it is really due. It is not the frame on which the garment is stretched at the fuller's, but the maker of it, that is admired. Yet the block wears it, and has it bound on itself. And as that wears it, but not for use, even so do some of these women, for the benefit of the garment, to air it, they say, that it may not be moth-eaten!    location 58684   
John Chrysostom, Homily 2  on First Timothy

{Cosmetics; 1 Tim 2:9}
Talk not of the precious spices of India, Arabia, and Persia, the moist and the dry, the perfumes and ointments, so costly and so useless. Why, O woman, do you lavish perfumes upon a body full of impurity within?    location 58689   
John Chrysostom, Homily 2  on First Timothy

{Rev 2:25; Mt 5:13}
With this we are anointed at our Baptism, then we savor sweetly of it; but it must be by our care afterwards that we retain the savor.    location 58703   
John Chrysostom, Homily 2  on First Timothy

{1 Pet 1:18-19}
And when we speak of the Laver, and of the remission of sins through it, this too they say is unworthy of God, that he who has committed offenses without number should have his sins remitted.    location 58855   
John Chrysostom, Homily 4 on First Timothy

{1 Tim 1:15-16; Phil 3:6; Rom 3:23}
"This is a faithful saying, and worthy of all acceptation, that Christ Jesus came into the world to save sinners; of whom I am chief. Howbeit for this cause I obtained mercy, that in me first Jesus Christ might show forth all longsuffering, for a pattern to them which should hereafter believe in Him to life everlasting." ... And this was visibly the situation of Paul, for he makes himself the example. Nor is he ashamed to call himself a sinner, but rather delights in it, as he thus can best demonstrate the miracle of God's regard for him, and that He had thought him worthy of such extraordinary kindness. But how is it, that he here calls himself a sinner, nay, the chief of sinners, whereas he elsewhere asserts that he was touching the righteousness which is in the law blameless? [Philippians 3:6] Because with respect to the righteousness which God has wrought, the justification which is really sought, even those who are righteous in the law are sinners, for all have sinned, and come short of the glory of God. [Romans 3:23] Therefore he does not say righteousness simply, but the righteousness which is in the law.    location 58863 
John Chrysostom, Homily 4 on First Timothy
 
{1 Tim 1:15-16; Rom 3:9-10}
Compared with Angels, even righteous men are sinners; and if Paul, who wrought the righteousness that is in the Law, was the chief of sinners, what other man can be called righteous? For he says not this to condemn his own life as impure, let not this be imagined; but comparing his own legal righteousness with the righteousness of God, he shows it to be nothing worth, and not only so, but he proves those who possess it to be sinners.    location 58870   
John Chrysostom, Homily 4 on First Timothy

{1 Tim 1:15-16}
There could then be no longer any doubt. This is what Paul says, that God, willing to give men full assurance that He pardons all their transgressions, chose, as the object of His mercy, him who was more a sinner than any; for when I obtained mercy, he argues, there could be no doubt of others:    location 58881   
John Chrysostom, Homily 4 on First Timothy

{Acts 1:22-26}
That is worthy requires a divine election [choice]. So it was of old, and so it is now, when we make a choice without human passion, not looking to any temporal consideration, swayed neither by friendship, nor enmity. For though we be not partakers of so great a measure of the Spirit as they, yet a good purpose is sufficient to draw unto us the election of God. For the Apostles, when they elected Matthias, had not yet received the Holy Spirit, but having committed the matter to prayer, they chose him into the number of the Apostles. For they looked not to human friendships.    location 58970   
John Chrysostom, Homily 5 on First Timothy

{1 Tim 1:18; 1 Sam 10:22; Acts 13:2}
"This charge I commit unto you, son [my child, teknon ] Timothy, according to the prophecies which went before on you, that you by them might [may] war a good warfare; holding faith, and a good conscience; which some having put away have made shipwreck concerning the faith." ... What is by prophecy? By the Holy Spirit. For prophecy is not only the telling of things future, but also of the present. It was by prophecy that Saul was discovered hidden among the stuff. [1 Samuel 10:22] For God reveals things to the righteous. So it was said by prophecy, Separate me Barnabas and Saul. [Acts 13:2] In this way Timothy also was chosen, concerning whom he speaks of prophecies in the plural;    location 58977   
John Chrysostom, Homily 5 on First Timothy

{1 Tim 1:18}
The committing, however, implies that it is to be diligently kept, and that it is not our own. For we did not obtain it for ourselves, but God conferred it upon us; and not it only, but also faith and a good conscience.    location 58985   
John Chrysostom, Homily 5 on First Timothy

{1 Tim 1:18; 1 Cor 9:27}
For as he who has not first been a good soldier, will never be a general, so it is with the Teacher; wherefore he says elsewhere, Lest when I have preached to others, I myself should be a cast-away. [1 Corinthians 9:27] Holding faith, he says, and a good conscience, that so you may preside over others. When we hear this, let us not disdain the exhortations of our superiors, though we be Teachers.    location 58996
John Chrysostom, Homily 5 on First Timothy
 
{1 Tim 1:19}
For that they may not be tormented with the fear of futurity, they endeavor to persuade their souls, that what we preach is false. And some turn aside from the faith, who seek out everything by reasoning; for reasoning produces shipwreck, while faith is as a safe ship.    location 59002   
John Chrysostom, Homily 5 on First Timothy

{1 Tim 1:19}
As the shipwrecked man is naked and destitute of all things,    location 59007   
John Chrysostom, Homily 5 on First Timothy

{Jas 2:14-26}
And if faith without a good life is unavailing, much more is the converse true.    location 59009   
John Chrysostom, Homily 5 on First Timothy

{Job 1:12; Job 2:6}
Job also was delivered to Satan, but not for his sins, but for fuller proof of his worth.    location 59034   
John Chrysostom, Homily 5 on First Timothy

{1 Cor 11:30}
This is shown by Paul. For this cause many are weak and sickly among you, and many sleep. [1 Corinthians 11:30] But how? Says one, when we approach but once a year! But this is indeed the evil, that you determine the worthiness of your approach, not by the purity of your minds, but by the interval of time. You think it a proper caution not to communicate often; not considering that you are seared by partaking unworthily, though only once, but to receive worthily, though often, is salutary. It is not presumptuous to receive often, but to receive unworthily, though but once in a whole life.    location 59036   
John Chrysostom, Homily 5 on First Timothy

{Communion}
The mystery [i.e. communion] at Pascha is not of more efficacy than that which is now celebrated. It is one and the same.    location 59044   
John Chrysostom, Homily 5 on First Timothy

{1 Cor 11:26}
On the Preparation, on the Sabbath, on the Lord's Day, and on the Day of Martyrs, it is the same sacrifice that is performed. For as often, he says, as you eat this bread and drink this cup, you do show the Lord's death. [1 Corinthians 11:26] No time is limited for the performance of this sacrifice, why then is it then called the Paschal feast?    location 59046   
John Chrysostom, Homily 5 on First Timothy

{1 Cor 11:26-31}
But you say, "Are not the forty days' fastings sufficient to cleanse the huge heap of our sins?" But of what use is it, tell me? If wishing to store up some precious ointment, you should make clean a place to receive it, and a little after having laid it up, should throw dung upon it, would not the fine odor vanish?    location 59053   
John Chrysostom, Homily 5 on First Timothy

{1 Tim 2:1-4}
"I exhort therefore that, first of all, supplications, prayers, intercessions, and giving of thanks be made for all men; for kings, and for all that are in authority; that we may lead a quiet and peaceable life in all godliness and honesty. For this is good and acceptable in the sight of God our Saviour; who will have all men to be saved, and to come unto the knowledge of the truth. [R.V.: who wills]" ... What is first of all? It means in the daily service; and the initiated know how this is done every day both in the evening and the morning, how we offer prayers for the whole world, for kings and all that are in authority.    location 59071   
John Chrysostom, Homily 6 on First Timothy

{1 Tim 2:1; Rom 13:5}
he exhorts them to obey their rulers, not for wrath but for conscience' sake. [Romans 13:5] For God has appointed government for the public good. When therefore they make war for this end, and stand on guard for our security, were it not unreasonable that we should not offer prayers for their safety in wars and dangers?    location 59078 
John Chrysostom, Homily 6 on First Timothy
 

{Gal 5:16-24}
For when the body is at variance with the soul, and raises up evil desires, and arms against it sensual pleasures, or the bad passions of anger, and envy; we cannot attain the promised blessings, till this war is brought to an end;    location 59163   
John Chrysostom, Homily 7 on First Timothy

{1 Tim 2:4}
Ver. 4. Who wills that all men should be saved, and come to the knowledge of the truth. Imitate God! If He wills that all men should be saved, there is reason why one should pray for all, if He has willed that all should be saved, be thou willing also; and if you wish it, pray for it, for wishes lead to prayers.    location 59186  
John Chrysostom, Homily 7 on First Timothy
 
{Mt 6:6; 1 Tim 2:8}
We must first consider what means, enter into your closet, and why Christ commands this, if we are to pray in every place? Or whether we may not pray in the church, nor in any other part of the house, but the closet?    location 59270   
John Chrysostom, Homily 8 on First Timothy

{Mt 6:6}
recommending us to avoid ostentation, when He bids us offer our prayers not only privately, but secretly.    location 59271   
John Chrysostom, Homily 8 on First Timothy

{1 Tim 2:8; Mt 5:5-6; 1 Tim 2:1; 1 Tim 2:6}
He did not limit prayer to one place, but required one thing alone, the absence of vainglory. The object of Paul is to distinguish the Christian from the Jewish prayers, therefore observe what he says: In every place lifting up holy hands, which was not permitted the Jews, for they were not allowed to approach God, to sacrifice and perform their services, elsewhere, but assembling from all parts of the world in one place, they were bound to perform all their worship in the temple. In opposition to this he introduces his precept, and freeing them from this necessity, he says in effect, Our ways are not like the Jewish; for as Christ commanded us to pray for all men because He died for all men, and I preach these things for all men, so it is good to pray everywhere.    location 59274   
John Chrysostom, Homily 8 on First Timothy

{1 Tim 2:8}
And what is holy? Pure. And what is pure? Not washed with water, but free from covetousness, murder, rapacity, violence, without wrath and doubting.    location 59280   
John Chrysostom, Homily 8 on First Timothy

{1 Tim 2:8; Mt 21:22; Mk 11:25}
What is without doubting? Let us hear. It implies that we should have no misgiving but that we shall be heard. For it is said, whatever you ask believing you shall receive. [Matthew 21:22] And again, when you stand praying forgive, if you have anything against any one. [Mark 11:25] This is to pray without wrath and doubting.    location 59283   
John Chrysostom, Homily 8 on First Timothy

{1 Tim 2:9}
In like manner he says, I will that women approach God without wrath and doubting, lifting up holy hands: that they should not follow their own desires, nor be covetous or rapacious. For what if a woman does not rob or steal herself, but does it through means of her husband?    location 59289   
John Chrysostom, Homily 8 on First Timothy

{1 Tim 2:9-10}
requires something more of women, that they adorn themselves in modest apparel, with shamefacedness and sobriety; not with broidered hair or gold or pearls or costly array; But (which becomes women professing godliness) with good works. But what is this modest apparel? Such attire as covers them completely, and decently, not with superfluous ornaments, for the one is becoming, the other is not.    location 59291   
John Chrysostom, Homily 8 on First Timothy

{1 Tim 2:9}
What? Do you approach God to pray, with broidered hair and ornaments of gold? Are you come to a dance?    location 59294   
John Chrysostom, Homily 8 on First Timothy

{1 Tim 2:9}
You have come to pray, to supplicate for pardon of your sins, to plead for your offenses, beseeching the Lord, and hoping to render Him propitious to you. Why do you adorn yourself? This is not the dress of a suppliant. How can you groan? How can you weep? How pray with fervency, when thus attired?    location 59295   
John Chrysostom, Homily 8 on First Timothy

{1 Tim 2:9; 1 Pet 3:3}
She that weeps ought not to be wearing gold.    location 59298   
John Chrysostom, Homily 8 on First Timothy

{1 Tim 2:9; 1 Pet 3:3}
And if he would remove those things which are only the indications of wealth, as gold, and pearls, and costly array; how much more those things which imply studied ornament, as painting, coloring the eyes, a mincing gait, the affected voice, a languishing and wanton look; the exquisite care in putting on the cloak and bodice, the nicely wrought girdle, and the closely-fitted shoes? For he glances at all these things, in speaking of modest apparel and shamefacedness. For such things are shameless and indecent.    location 59306   
John Chrysostom, Homily 8 on First Timothy

{1 Tim 2:9; 1 Pet 3:3}
What can one say to the perpetual rolling of the eyes? To the putting on of the stomacher; so artfully as sometimes to conceal, sometimes to disclose, the fastening? For this too they sometimes expose, so as to show the exquisiteness of the cincture, winding the hood entirely round the head.    location 59318   
John Chrysostom, Homily 8 on First Timothy

{1 Tim 2:9; 1 Pet 3:3}
A virgin's dress should not be studied, but plain, and without labor; but now they have many artifices to make their dress conspicuous.    location 59327   
John Chrysostom, Homily 8 on First Timothy

{1 Tim 2:9; 1 Pet 3:3}
I say nothing about the voice, though much affectation is shown in this also, nor about perfumes, and other such luxuries. It is for these things we are ridiculed by the women of the world. The respect for virginity is lost. No one honors a virgin as she ought to be honored.    location 59342   
John Chrysostom, Homily 8 on First Timothy

{1 Tim 2:9; 1 Pet 3:3}
See what care! What pains! In your humble dress, you exceed her who wears the costliest ornament, and art more studious of appearance than she who is arrayed in gold.    location 59347   
John Chrysostom, Homily 8 on First Timothy

{1 Tim 2:11; 1 Cor 14:35}
And what says he? Let the woman learn in silence; that is, let her not speak at all in the church; which rule he has also given in his Epistle to the Corinthians, where he says, It is a shame for women to speak in the church [1 Corinthians 14:35]; and the reason is, that the law has made them subject to men.  ... And again elsewhere, "And if they will learn anything, let them ask their husbands at home. [1 Corinthians 14:35]    location 59360   
John Chrysostom, Homily 9 on First Timothy

{1 Tim 2:11}
Then indeed the women, from such teaching, kept silence; but now there is apt to be great noise among them, much clamor and talking, and nowhere so much as in this place. They may all be seen here talking more than in the market, or at the bath. For, as if they came hither for recreation, they are all engaged in conversing upon unprofitable subjects. Thus all is confusion, and they seem not to understand, that unless they are quiet, they cannot learn anything that is useful. For when our discourse strains against the talking, and no one minds what is said, what good can it do to them? To such a degree should women be silent, that they are not allowed to speak not only about worldly matters, but not even about spiritual things, in the church.    location 59361   
John Chrysostom, Homily 9 on First Timothy

{1 Tim 2:11-15; 1 Cor 11:9; Gen 3:16}
For thus they will show submission by their silence. For the sex is naturally somewhat talkative: and for this reason he restrains them on all sides. For Adam, says he, was first formed, then Eve. And Adam was not deceived, but the woman being deceived was in the transgression. If it be asked, what has this to do with women of the present day? It shows that the male sex enjoyed the higher honor. Man was first formed; and elsewhere he shows their superiority. Neither was the man created for the woman, but the woman for the man. [1 Corinthians 11:9] Why then does he say this? He wishes the man to have the preeminence in every way; both for the reason given above, he means, let him have precedence, and on account of what occurred afterwards. For the woman taught the man once, and made him guilty of disobedience, and wrought our ruin. Therefore because she made a bad use of her power over the man, or rather her equality with him, God made her subject to her husband. Your desire shall be to your husband? [Genesis 3:16] This had not been said to her before.    location 59369  
John Chrysostom, Homily 9 on First Timothy

{1 Tim 2:14} 
But how was Adam not deceived? If he was not deceived, he did not then transgress? Attend carefully. The woman said, The serpent beguiled me. But the man did not say, The woman deceived me, but, she gave me of the tree, and I did eat. Now it is not the same thing to be deceived by a fellow-creature, one of the same kind, as by an inferior and subordinate animal. This is truly to be deceived. Compared therefore with the woman, he is spoken of as not deceived. For she was beguiled by an inferior and subject, he by an equal. Again, it is not said of the man, that he saw the tree was good for food, but of the woman, and that she did eat, and gave it to her husband: so that he transgressed, not captivated by appetite, but merely from the persuasion of his wife. The woman taught once, and ruined all. On this account therefore he says, let her not teach.    location 59377   
John Chrysostom, Homily 9 on First Timothy

{1 Tim 2:14; Rom 5:14}
But what is it to other women, that she suffered this? It certainly concerns them; for the sex is weak and fickle, and he is speaking of the sex collectively. For he says not Eve, but the woman, which is the common name of the whole sex, not her proper name. Was then the whole sex included in the transgression for her fault? As he said of Adam, After the similitude of Adam's transgression, who is the figure of Him that was to come [Romans 5:14]; so here the female sex transgressed, and not the male.    location 59383   
John Chrysostom, Homily 9 on First Timothy

{1 Tim 2:15}
Shall not women then be saved? Yes, by means of children. For it is not of Eve that he says, If they continue in faith and charity and holiness with sobriety. What faith? What charity? What holiness with sobriety? It is as if he had said, You women, be not cast down, because your sex has incurred blame. God has granted you another opportunity of salvation, by the bringing up of children, so that you are saved, not only by yourselves, but by others.    location 59386   
John Chrysostom, Homily 9 on First Timothy

{1 Tim 2:15}
Yes, it was, still Eve transgressed, but the whole sex shall be saved, notwithstanding, by childbearing. And why not by their own personal virtue? For has she excluded others from this salvation? And what will be the case with virgins, with the barren, with widows who have lost their husbands, before they had children? will they perish? Is there no hope for them? Yet virgins are held in the highest estimation. What then does he mean to say? Some interpret his meaning thus. As what happened to the first woman occasioned the subjection of the whole sex, (for since Eve was formed second and made subject, he says, let the rest of the sex be in subjection,) so because she transgressed, the rest of the sex are also in transgression. But this is not fair reasoning; for at the creation all was the gift of God, but in this case, it is the consequence of the woman's sin. But this is the amount of what he says. As all men died through one, because that one sinned, so the whole female race transgressed, because the woman was in the transgression. Let her not however grieve. God has given her no small consolation, that of childbearing. And if it be said that this is of nature, so is that also of nature; for not only that which is of nature has been granted, but also the bringing up of children. If they continue in faith and charity and holiness with sobriety; that is, if after childbearing, they keep them in charity and purity. By these means they will have no small reward on their account, because they have trained up wrestlers for the service of Christ.    location 59391   
John Chrysostom, Homily 9 on First Timothy


{1 Tim 3:1}
And what says he? If a man desire the office of a Bishop, I do not blame him, for it is a work of protection. If any one has this desire, so that he does not covet the dominion and authority, but wishes to protect the Church, I blame him not. For he desires a good work.   Location: 59,451 John Chrysostom, Homily 10 on First Timothy

{1 Tim 3:2}
A Bishop then, he says, must be blameless, the husband of one wife. This he does not lay down as a rule, as if he must not be without one, but as prohibiting his having more than one.   Location: 59,453  
John Chrysostom, Homily 10 on First Timothy

{1 Tim 3:2}
Blameless. Every virtue is implied in this word; so that if any one be conscious to himself of any sins, he does not well to desire an office for which his own actions have disqualified him.   Location: 59,463  
John Chrysostom, Homily 10 on First Timothy

{1 Tim 3:2}
to show what is peculiar to the Bishops, adds, apt to teach. For this is not required of him that is ruled, but is most essential to him who has this rule committed to him.   Location: 59,465 John Chrysostom, Homily 10 on First Timothy

{1 Tim 3:3}
Not given to wine: here he does not so much mean intemperate, as insolent and impudent. No striker: this too does not mean a striker with the hands. What means then no striker? Because there are some who unseasonably smite the consciences of their brethren, it seems to be said with reference to them.   Location: 59,479  John Chrysostom, Homily 10 on First Timothy

{Gal 5:24; Lk 15:33}
They that are Christ's have crucified the flesh; and Christ again says, Whosoever forsakes not all that he has, he is not worthy of Me. [Luke 15:33] Why are not these things required by Paul? Plainly because few could be found of such a character, and there was need of many Bishops, that one might preside in every city.   Location: 59,481 John Chrysostom, Homily 10 on First Timothy

{1 Tim 3:3}
But because the Churches were to be exposed to attacks, he requires not that superior and highly exalted virtue, but a moderate degree of it; for to be sober, of good behavior, and temperate, were qualities common to many.   Location: 59,484 John Chrysostom, Homily 10 on First Timothy

{1 Tim 3:4-5}
One that rules well his own house. Even those who are without say this, that he who is a good manager of a house will be a good statesman.   Location: 59,485 John Chrysostom, Homily 10 on First Timothy

{1 Tim 3:4-5}
For the Church is, as it were, a small household, and as in a house there are children and wife and domestics, and the man has rule over them all; just so in the Church there are women, children, servants.   Location: 59,490 John Chrysostom, Homily 10 on First Timothy

{1 Tim 3:6}
Ver. 6. Not a novice. He does not say, not a young man, but not a new convert.   Location: 59,494 John Chrysostom, Homily 10 on First Timothy

{2 Tim 3:15; 1 Tim 5:23}
From a child you have learned the holy Scriptures. [2 Timothy 3:15] And that he practiced intense fasting is proved by the words, Use a little wine   Location: 59,499  John Chrysostom, Homily 10 on First Timothy

{1 Tim 3:6}
therefore he adds, Lest being lifted up with pride, he fall into the condemnation of the devil, that is, into the same condemnation which Satan incurred by his pride.   Location: 59,501 John Chrysostom, Homily 10 on First Timothy

{1 Tim 3:2; 1 Cor 7:7}
and for the same reason perhaps he said, the husband of one wife, though elsewhere he says, I would that all men were even as I myself! [1 Corinthians 7:7], that is, practicing continency. That he may not therefore confine them within too narrow a limit, by requiring an over-strict conversation, he is satisfied to prescribe moderate virtue. For it was necessary to appoint one to preside in every city, as he writes to Titus,   Location: 59,563  
John Chrysostom, Homily 10 on First Timothy

{1 Tim 3:8-10}
That is, they should have the same qualities as Bishops.   Location: 59,569 John Chrysostom, Homily 11 on First Timothy

{1 Tim 3:9}
pure conscience. Thus he explains what he means by blameless. And here he requires, though in other words, that he be not a novice, where he says, Let these also first be proved, where the conjunction also is added, as connecting this with what had been said before of Bishops, for nothing intervenes between. And there is the same reason for the not a novice in that case. For would it not be absurd, that when a newly purchased slave is not entrusted with anything in a house, till he has by long trial given proofs of his character, yet that one should enter into the Church of God from a state of heathenism, and be at once placed in a station of preeminence?   Location: 59,573 
John Chrysostom, Homily 10 on First Timothy

{1 Tim 3:11}
Ver. 11. Even so must the women be grave, not slanderers, sober, faithful in all things. Some have thought that this is said of women generally, but it is not so, for why should he introduce anything about women to interfere with his subject? He is speaking of those who hold the rank of Deaconesses.   Location: 59,589  John Chrysostom, Homily 10 on First Timothy

{1 Tim 3:15}
how you ought to behave yourself in the house of God, which is the Church of the living God, the pillar and ground of the truth. Not like that Jewish house. For it is this that maintains the faith and the preaching of the Word. For the truth is the pillar and the ground of the Church.   Location: 59,591 John Chrysostom, Homily 10 on First Timothy

{1 Tim 3:16}
Ver. 16. And without controversy great is the mystery of godliness; God [He who] was manifest in the flesh, justified in the Spirit.   Location: 59,595  John Chrysostom, Homily 10 on First Timothy

{1 Tim 3:16}
saying, God was manifest in the flesh. The Creator was seen incarnate. He was justified in the Spirit. As it is said, Wisdom is justified of her children, or because He practiced no guile, as the Prophet says,   Location: 59,602 John Chrysostom, Homily 10 on First Timothy

{1 Tim 3:8}
The discretion of the blessed Paul is observable. When he would exhort the Deacons to avoid excess in wine, he does not say, Be not drunken, but not even given to much wine. A proper caution; for if those who served in the Temple did not taste wine at all, much more should not these. For wine produces disorder of mind, and where it does not cause drunkenness, it destroys the energies and relaxes the firmness of the soul.   Location: 59,667 John Chrysostom, Homily 10 on First Timothy

{1 Tim 4:1-3}
Marvel not, he says, if some having departed from the faith still adhere to Judaism. There will be a time, when even those who have partaken of the faith will fall into a worse error, not only with respect to meats, but to marriages, and other such things, introducing the most pernicious notions. This refers not to the Jews, (for the latter times, and a departure from the faith, is not applicable to them;) but to the Manichees, and the founders of these sects.   Location: 59,688 John Chrysostom, Homily 12 on First Timothy

{1 Tim 4:4}
But is not luxury forbidden? Certainly it is. But why? If good things are created to be received. Because He created bread, and yet too much is forbidden; and wine also, and yet excess is forbidden; and we are not commanded to avoid dainties as if they were unclean in themselves, but as they corrupt the soul by excess.   Location: 59,695 John Chrysostom, Homily 12 on First Timothy

{1 Tim 4:4-5}
therefore he lays down two positions: first, that no creature of God is unclean: secondly, that if it had become so, you have a remedy, seal it, give thanks, and glorify God, and all the uncleanness passes away. Can we then so cleanse that which is offered to an idol? If you know not that it was so offered. But if, knowing this, you partake of it, you will be unclean; not because it was offered to an idol, but because contrary to an express command, you thereby communicate with devils. So that it is not unclean by nature, but becomes so through your wilful disobedience. What then, is not swine's flesh unclean? By no means, when it is received with thanksgiving,   Location: 59,706 John Chrysostom, Homily 12 on First Timothy

{1 Tim 4:6}
being nourished up, he says, meaning to imply constancy in application to these things. For as we set before us day by day this bodily nourishment, so he means, let us be continually receiving discourses concerning the faith, and ever be nourished with them. What is this, being nourished up? Ruminating upon them; attending ever to the same things, and practicing ever the same, for it is no common nourishment that they supply.   Location: 59,709 John Chrysostom, Homily 12 on First Timothy

{1 Tim 4:7}
But refuse profane and old wives' fables. By these are meant Jewish traditions, and he calls them fables, either because of their falsehood or their unseasonableness.   Location: 59,711 John Chrysostom, Homily 12 on First Timothy

{1 Tim 4:7}
Profane and old wives' fables, he calls them, partly because of their obsoleteness, and partly because they are impediments to faith.   Location: 59,714 John Chrysostom, Homily 12 on First Timothy

{1 Tim 4:8}
Ver. 8. For bodily exercise profits little. This has by some been referred to fasting; but away with such a notion! For that is not a bodily but a spiritual exercise.   Location: 59,716 John Chrysostom, Homily 12 on First Timothy

{1 Tim 4:8}
For the exercise of the body has no profit, but may benefit the body a little, but the exercise of godliness yields fruit and advantage both here and hereafter.   Location: 59,723 John Chrysostom, Homily 12 on First Timothy

{1 Tim 4:10}
Ver. 10. For therefore we both labor and suffer reproach, because we trust in the living God, who is the Saviour of all men, especially of them that believe. This in effect is to say, wherefore do we mortify ourselves, unless we expect future blessings? Have we endured so many evils, submitted to so many reproaches, suffered such insults and calumnies, and such numerous calamities in vain? For if we did not trust in the living God, on what account did we submit to these things?   Location: 59,731 John Chrysostom, Homily 12 on First Timothy

{1 Tim 4:1-3; 1 Cor 7:38; 1 Cor 7:8; Mt 19:12}
For in the latter times, he says, some shall depart from the faith. Forbidding to marry. And do not we forbid to marry? God forbid. We do not forbid those who wish to marry, but those who do not wish to marry, we exhort to virginity. It is one thing to forbid, and another to leave one to his own free choice.   Location: 59,737 John Chrysostom, Homily 12 on First Timothy

{1 Tim 4:3; Deut 32:15}
And what was the object of the prohibition of so many meats? To restrain excessive luxury. But had it been said, eat not for the sake of luxury, it would not have been borne. They were therefore shut up under the necessity of the law, that they might abstain from the stronger principle of fear. The fish was not forbidden, though it was manifestly more unclean than the swine. But they might have learned how pernicious luxury was from that saying of Moses, Jeshurun waxed fat, and kicked. [Deuteronomy 32:15] Another cause of these prohibitions might be, that being straitened for other food, they might be reduced to slaughter sheep and oxen; he therefore restrained them from other things, on account of Apis and the calf, which was an abomination, ungrateful, polluted, and profane.   Location: 59,751 John Chrysostom, Homily 12 on First Timothy

{1 Tim 4:8; 1 Tim 2:9-10}
but godliness is profitable for all things, having the promise of the life that now is, and of that which is to come. And why, says one, does he mention this bodily exercise? To show by comparison the superiority of the other, in that the former is of no solid advantage, though it is attended with many toils, while the latter has a lasting and abundant good. As when he bids women adorn themselves, not with broidered hair, or gold, or costly array: but which becomes women possessing godliness; with good works. [1 Timothy 2:9-10]   Location: 59,812 John Chrysostom, Homily 12 on First Timothy

{1 Tim 4:11}
For instance, it is not proper to teach a man not to be wicked, but to command; to forbid it with all authority. Not to profess Judaism, should be a command, but teaching is required, when you would lead men to part with their possessions, to profess virginity, or when you would discourse of faith.   Location: 59,819 John Chrysostom, Homily 13 on First Timothy

{1 Tim 4:11}
Command and teach. When a man uses amulets, or does anything of that kind, knowing it to be wrong, he requires only a command; but he who does it ignorantly, is to be taught his error.   Location: 59,821 John Chrysostom, Homily 13 on First Timothy

{1 Tim 4:12}
But because, from a common prejudice, youth is apt to be despised, therefore he says, Let no man despise your youth. For a teacher ought not to be exposed to contempt.   Location: 59,833 John Chrysostom, Homily 13 on First Timothy

{1 Tim 4:13}
Till I come, he says, give attendance to reading the divine writings, to exhortation of one another, to teaching of all.   Location: 59,834 John Chrysostom, Homily 13 on First Timothy

{1 Tim 4:14}
Neglect not the gift that is in you, which was given you by prophecy. Here he calls teaching prophecy. With the laying on of the hands of the presbytery. He speaks not here of Presbyters, but of Bishops. For Presbyters cannot be supposed   Location: 59,839 John Chrysostom, Homily 13 on First Timothy

{1 Tim 4:16; Mt 13:52; Rom 15:4}
For in so doing you shall both save yourself and them that hear you. It is well said, You shall save yourself. For he that is nourished up in the words of sound doctrine, first receives the benefit of it himself. From admonishing others, he is touched with compunction himself. For these things are not said to Timothy only, but to all. And if such advice is addressed to him, who raised the dead, what shall be said to us? Christ also shows the duty of teachers, when He says, The kingdom of heaven is like an householder, who brings forth out of his treasure things new and old. [Matthew 13:52] And the blessed Paul gives the same advice, that we through patience and comfort of the Scriptures might have hope. [Romans 15:4]   Location: 59,848 John Chrysostom, Homily 13 on First Timothy

{1 Tim 4:15-16}
That your profiting may appear, he says, to all. Thus he would have him appear great and admirable in this respect also, showing that this was still necessary for him, for he wished that his profiting should appear not only in his life, but in the word of doctrine.   Location: 59,861 John Chrysostom, Homily 13 on First Timothy

{1 Tim 5:3}
Ver. 3. Honor widows, that are widows indeed. Why does he say nothing of virginity, nor command us to honor virgins? Perhaps there were not yet any professing that state,   Location: 59,863 John Chrysostom, Homily 13 on First Timothy

{1 Tim 5:3-7}
For a woman may have lost her husband, and yet not be truly a widow. As in order to be a virgin, it is not enough to be a stranger to marriage, but many other things are necessary, as blamelessness and perseverance; so the loss of a husband does not constitute a widow, but patience, with chastity and separation from all men. Such widows he justly bids us honor, or rather support. For they need support, being left desolate, and having no husband to stand up for them.   Location: 59,873 John Chrysostom, Homily 13 on First Timothy

{1 Tim 5:5}
Ver. 5. Now she that is a widow indeed, and desolate, trusts in God, and continues in supplications and prayers night and day. But she that lives in pleasure is dead while she lives. She who being a widow has not made choice of a worldly life, is a widow indeed; she who trusts in God as she ought, and continues instant in prayer night and day, is a widow indeed. Not that she, who has children, is not a widow indeed. For he commends her who brings up children as she ought. But if any one has not children, he means, she is desolate, and her he consoles, saying, that she is most truly a widow, who has lost not only the consolation of a husband, but that arising from children, yet she has God in the place of all.   Location: 59,883 John Chrysostom, Homily 13 on First Timothy

{1 Tim 5:6}
She that lives in pleasure is dead while she lives. Ought not a widow then to live in pleasure? Surely not. If then when nature and age is weak, a life of pleasure is not allowable, but leads to death, eternal death;   Location: 59,886 John Chrysostom, Homily 13 on First Timothy

{Mt 25:34-35}
The living perform the works of life, of that future life, which is truly life. And Christ has declared what are the works of that future life, with which we ought always to be occupied. Come, inherit the kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of the world. For I was an hungered, and you gave me meat. I was thirsty, and you gave me drink. [Matthew 25:34-35] The living differ from the dead, not only in that they behold the sun, and breathe the air, but in that they are doing some good. For if this be wanting, the living are not better than the dead.   Location: 59,963 John Chrysostom, Homily 13 on First Timothy

{1 Tim 5:8}
Many consider that their own virtue is sufficient for their salvation, and if they duly regulate their own life, that nothing further is wanting to save them. But in this they greatly err, which is proved by the example of him who buried his one talent, for he brought it back not diminished but entire, and just as it had been delivered to him. It is shown also by the blessed Paul, who says here, If any one provide not for his own. The provision of which he speaks is universal, and relates to the soul as well as the body, since both are to be provided for.   Location: 59,968 John Chrysostom, Homily 14 on First Timothy

{1 Tim 5:8; Isa 58:7[LXX]}
and especially for those of his own house, that is, those who are nearly related to him, he is worse than an infidel. And so says Isaiah, the chief of the Prophets, You shall not overlook your kinsmen of your own seed. [Isaiah 58:7, Septuagint] For if a man deserts those who are united by ties of kindred and affinity, how shall he be affectionate towards others? Will it not have the appearance of vainglory, when benefiting others he slights his own relations, and does not provide for them?   Location: 59,976 John Chrysostom, Homily 14 on First Timothy

{1 Tim 5:8; Titus 1:15; Isa 58:7}
But how has he denied the faith? Even as it is said, They profess that they know God, but in works they deny Him. [Titus 1:16] What has God, in whom they believe, commanded? Hide not yourself from your own flesh. [Isaiah 58:7] How does he then believe who thus denies God? Let those consider this, who to spare their wealth neglect their kindred. It was the design of God, in uniting us by the ties of kindred, to afford us many opportunities of doing good to one another. When therefore you neglect a duty which infidels perform, have you not denied the faith?   Location: 59,981 John Chrysostom, Homily 14 on First Timothy

{1 Tim 5:8}
For since he had spoken of luxury and self-indulgence, he says that it is not for this only that such a woman is punished, because she is luxurious, but because her luxury compels her to neglect her household. This he says with reason; for she that lives to the belly, perishes hereby also, as having denied the faith. But how is she worse than an infidel? Because it is not the same thing to neglect our kindred, as to neglect a stranger. How should it be? But the fault is greater here, to desert one known than one who is unknown to us,   Location: 59,991 John Chrysostom, Homily 14 on First Timothy

{1 Tim 5:9}
But why then is he particular about the age? He afterwards assigns a cause not originating with himself, but with the widows themselves.   Location: 59,992 John Chrysostom, Homily 14 on First Timothy

{1 Tim 5:10; 1 Tim 2:15}
Well reported of for good works, if she have brought up children. Truly, it is no unimportant work to bring up children; but bringing them up is not merely taking care of them; they must be brought up well; as he said before, If they continue in faith, and charity, and holiness. [1 Timothy 2:15]   Location: 60,000  John Chrysostom, Homily 14 on First Timothy

{1 Tim 5:9-10}

Strange! What strictness does he require of widows; almost as much as of the Bishop himself.   Location: 60,002 John Chrysostom, Homily 14 on First Timothy

{Lk 2:36-37}
When he cuts off luxury, he would have her provident, a good economist, and at the same time continually persevering in prayer. Such was Anna.   Location: 60,005 John Chrysostom, Homily 14 on First Timothy

{1 Cor 7:32-34; 1 Cor 7:39-40}
You see that it is not merely the not contracting a second marriage that is enough to make a widow, many other things are necessary. But why does he discourage second marriages? Is the thing condemned? By no means. That is heretical. Only he would have her henceforth occupied in spiritual things, transferring all her care to virtue. For marriage is not an impure state, but one of much occupation. He speaks of their having leisure, not of their being more pure by remaining unmarried. For marriage certainly implies much secular engagement.   Location: 60,012 John Chrysostom, Homily 14 on First Timothy

{1 Tim 5:10; Jn 13:14}
Observe, the hospitality here spoken of is not merely a friendly reception, but one given with zeal and alacrity, with readiness, and going about it as if one were receiving Christ Himself. The widows should perform these services themselves, not commit them to their handmaids. For Christ said, If I your Master and Lord have washed your feet, you ought also to wash one another's feet. [John 13:14] And though a woman may be very rich, and of the highest rank, vain of her birth and noble family, there is not the same distance between her and others, as between God and the disciples. If you receive the stranger as Christ,   Location: 60,017 John Chrysostom, Homily 14 on First Timothy

{Gen 18:1-8}
Abraham was receiving men that passed as travelers, as he thought, and he did not leave to his servants to make the preparations for their entertainment, but took the greater part of the service upon himself, and commanded his wife to mix the flour, though he had three hundred and eighteen servants born in his house, of whom there must have been many maidservants; but he wished that himself and his wife should have the reward, not of the cost only, but of the service.   Location: 60,147 John Chrysostom, Homily 14 on First Timothy

{1 Tim 5:11-12; 1 Cor 7:34-35}
proceeds now to say, But the younger widows refuse. But concerning virgins, though the case of their falling is a much more gross one, he has said nothing of this kind, and rightly. For they had enrolled themselves on higher views, and the work with them proceeded from a greater elevation of mind. Therefore the receiving of strangers, and the washing of the Saints' feet, he has represented by attending upon the Lord without distraction [1 Corinthians 7:34-35], and by saying, The unmarried cares for the things that belong to the Lord. [1 Corinthians 7:34-35] And if he has not limited a particular age for them, it is most likely because that point is settled by what he has said in this case. But indeed, as I said, the choice of virginity proceeded from a higher purpose.   Location: 60,160 John Chrysostom, Homily 15 on First Timothy

{1 Tim 5:11-12; 1 Cor 7:34-35}
For that some had already fallen away is plain, in that he says, When they have begun to wax wanton against Christ, they will marry; and again, For some have already turned aside after Satan. The younger widows refuse, for when they have begun to wax wanton against Christ, they will marry; that is, when they have become scornful and luxurious. For as in the case of a just man, we might say, Let her depart, for she has become another's. He shows therefore that though they chose widowhood, it was not the choice of their judgment. So then a widow, by the state of widowhood, is espoused to Christ.   Location: 60,165 John Chrysostom, Homily 15 on First Timothy

{2 Cor 11:2; 1 Tim 5:12-13}
Elsewhere indeed he says, I have espoused you to one husband, that I may present you as a chaste virgin to Christ. [2 Corinthians 11:2] After having given their names to Him, they will marry, he says, having condemnation, because they have cast off their first faith. By faith he means, fidelity to their covenant. As if he had said, They have been false to Christ, they have dishonored Him, and transgressed His covenant. And withal they learn to be idle. Thus he commands not only men, but women also, to work. For idleness is the teacher of every sin. And not only are they exposed to this condemnation, but to other sins. If therefore it is unbecoming for a married woman to go from house to house, much more is it for a virgin.   Location: 60,174 John Chrysostom, Homily 15 on First Timothy

{1 Tim 5:13-15}
And nothing is so unbecoming to a woman, as to busy herself in the concerns of others, and it is no less unbecoming to a man. This is a great sign of impudence and forwardness. I will therefore, he says, (since they themselves wish it,) that the younger widows marry, bear children, guide the house. This course is at least preferable to the other. They ought indeed to be concerned for the things of God, they ought to preserve their faith. But since they do not this, it is better to avoid a worse course. God is not dishonored by their marrying again, and they do not fall into those practices, which have been censured. From such a widowhood, no good could arise, but good may come out of this marriage.   Location: 60,188 John Chrysostom, Homily 15 on First Timothy

{1 Tim 5:16}
And he has well said, If any believer. For it is not fit that believing women should be maintained by unbelievers, lest they should seem to stand in need of them.   Location: 60,195 John Chrysostom, Homily 15 on First Timothy

{1 Tim 5:17-18; Deut 25:4; Lk 10:7}
Ver. 17, 18. Let the elders that rule well be counted worthy of double honor, especially they who labor in the word and doctrine. For the Scripture says, You shall not muzzle the ox that treads out the grain. And, The laborer is worthy of his reward. The honor of which he here speaks is attention to them, and the supply of their necessities, as is shown by his adding, You shall not muzzle the ox that treads out the grain [Deuteronomy 25:4]; and, The laborer is worthy of his reward. [Luke 10:7] So when he says, Honor widows, he means, support them in all that is necessary.   Location: 60,203 John Chrysostom, Homily 15 on First Timothy

{1 Tim 5:17-18}
The laborer, he says, is worthy of his reward. So that if any one lives in sloth and luxury, he is unworthy of it. Unless he is as the ox treading out the grain, and bearing the yoke, in spite of heat and thorns, and ceases not till he has carried the grain into the granary, he is not worthy. Therefore to teachers should be granted a supply of their necessities without grudging, that they may not faint nor be discouraged, nor by attention to inferior things deprive themselves of greater; that they may labor for spiritual things, paying no regard to worldly things.   Location: 60,207 John Chrysostom, Homily 15 on First Timothy

{1 Tim 5:17-18; Num 18:24}
It was thus with the Levites; they had no worldly concerns, because the laity took care to provide for them, and their revenues were appointed by the law, as tythes, offerings of gold, first-fruits, vows, and many other things.   Location: 60,209 John Chrysostom, Homily 15 on First Timothy

{1 Tim 5:17-18}
But I shall say no more than that those who preside ought to have food and raiment, that they may not be distracted by care for these things. But what is double support? Double that of the widows, or of the deacons, or simply, liberal support. Let us not then think only of the double maintenance granted them, but of what is added, Those who rule well.   Location: 60,326 John Chrysostom, Homily 15 on First Timothy

{1 Cor 9:27; 1 Tim 5:21}
For though Timothy was his beloved son, he did not therefore stand in awe of him. For as he was not ashamed to say of himself, Lest by any means when I have preached to others, I myself should be a cast-away [1 Corinthians 9:27]; much less would he be afraid or ashamed in the case of Timothy.   Location: 60,337 John Chrysostom, Homily 16 on First Timothy

{1 Tim 5:21}
That thou observe these things without preferring one before another, doing nothing by partiality. That is, that you deal impartially and equally between those who are upon trial and are to be judged by you, that no one may pre-occupy your mind, or gain you over to his side beforehand.   Location: 60,342  John Chrysostom, Homily 16 on First Timothy

{1 Tim 5:22}
the matter of Ordinations. Lay hands, he says, suddenly on no man, neither be partaker of other men's sins. What is suddenly? Not upon a first, nor a second, nor a third trial, but after frequent and strict examination and circumspection. For it is an affair of no common peril. For you will be responsible for the sins committed by him, as well his past as his future sins, because you have delegated to him this power. For if you overlook the past unduly, you are answerable for the future also, as being the cause of them, by placing him in that station, and of the past too,   Location: 60,348  John Chrysostom, Homily 16 on First Timothy

{1 Tim 5:23}
Drink no longer water, but use a little wine for your stomach's sake and your often infirmities. If one who had practiced fasting to such an extent, and used only water, so long that he had brought on infirmities and frequent infirmities,   Location: 60,350 John Chrysostom, Homily 16 on First Timothy

{1 Tim 5:23; 2 Cor 12:11}
But why did not Paul restore strength to his stomach? Not because he could not- for he whose garment had raised the dead was clearly able to do this too-but because he had a design of importance in withholding such aid. What then was his purpose? That even now, if we see great and virtuous men afflicted with infirmities, we may not be offended, for this was a profitable visitation. If indeed to Paul himself a messenger of Satan was sent that he should not be exalted above measure [2 Corinthians 12:11], much more might it be so with Timothy. For the miracles he wrought were enough to have rendered him arrogant. For this reason he is left to be subject to the rules of medicine, that he may be humbled, and others may not be offended,   Location: 60,356  John Chrysostom, Homily 16 on First Timothy

{1 Tim 5:23}
In other respects also Timothy seems to have been subject to disease, which is implied by that expression, Your often infirmities, as well of other parts as of the stomach. He does not however allow him to indulge freely in wine, but as much as was for health and not for luxury.   Location: 60,362  John Chrysostom, Homily 16 on First Timothy

{1 Tim 6:1}
"Let as many servants as are under the yoke count their masters worthy of all honor, that the Name of God and His doctrine be not blasphemed." Let them count them worthy of all honor, he says; for do not suppose, because you are a believer, that you are therefore a free man: since your freedom is to serve the more faithfully. For if the unbeliever sees slaves conducting themselves insolently on account of their faith, he will blaspheme, as if the Doctrine produced insubordination. But when he sees them obedient, he will be more inclined to believe, and will the rather attend to our words.   Location: 60,373  John Chrysostom, Homily 16 on First Timothy

{1 Tim 5:24-25}
What is the use of mentioning this? Because if here any escape detection, they will not hereafter. There all things are laid open; and this is the greatest consolation to those who do well.   Location: 60,378  John Chrysostom, Homily 16 on First Timothy

{1 Tim 6:1; Eph 6:9}
But the masters he recommends to forbear the use of terror. Forbearing threatening [Ephesians 6:9], he says. And why does he thus command? In the case of unbelievers, naturally, because it would have been unreasonable to address those who would pay no heed to him; but where believers were concerned, what was his reason? Because masters contribute greater benefits to their servants, than servants to their masters. For the former furnish the money to purchase for them sufficient food and clothing; and bestow much care upon them in other respects, so that the masters pay them the larger service, which is here intimated, when he says, they are faithful and beloved, partakers of the benefit. They suffer much toil and trouble for your repose, ought they not in return to receive much honor from their servants?   Location: 60,383 John Chrysostom, Homily 16 on First Timothy

{1 Tim 6:2}
But if he exhorts servants to render such implicit obedience, consider what ought to be our disposition towards our Master, who brought us into existence out of nothing, and who feeds and clothes us.   Location: 60,423  John Chrysostom, Homily 16 on First Timothy

{1 Tim 6:2; 1 Tim 4:11}
A teacher has need not only of authority, but of gentleness, and not only of gentleness, but of authority. And all these the blessed Paul teaches, at one time saying, These things command and teach [1 Timothy 4:11]; at another, These things teach and exhort.   Location: 60,435 John Chrysostom, Homily 17 on First Timothy

{1 Tim 6:3-5}
he is proud, knowing nothing. Presumption therefore arises not from knowledge, but from knowing nothing. For he that knows the doctrines of godliness is also the most disposed to moderation. He who knows sound words, is not unsound.  Location: 60,453  John Chrysostom, Homily 17 on First Timothy

{1 Tim 6:3-5; Titus 3:10}
From such withdraw yourself. He does not say, engage and contend with them, but withdraw yourself, turn away from them; as elsewhere he says, A man that is an heretic after the first and second admonition reject. [Titus 3:10] He shows that they do not so much err from ignorance, as they owe their ignorance to their indolence.   Location: 60,465 John Chrysostom, Homily 17 on First Timothy

{1 Tim 6:8}
Ver. 8. And having food and raiment, let us be therewith content. Such things, and so much ought we to eat, as will suffice to nourish us, and such things should we put on, as will cover us, and clothe our nakedness, and nothing more; and a common garment will answer this purpose.   Location: 60,468  John Chrysostom, Homily 17 on First Timothy

{1 Tim 6:9-10}
Ver. 9. But they that will be rich; not those that are rich, but those who wish to be. For a man may have money and make a good use of it, not overvaluing it, but bestowing it upon the poor. Such therefore he does not blame, but the covetous.   Location: 60,476  John Chrysostom, Homily 17 on First Timothy

{1 Tim 6:11}
Flee these things, and follow after righteousness. Both expressions are emphatic; he does not say turn from one, and approach the other, but flee these things, pursue righteousness, so as not to be covetous.   Location: 60,482  John Chrysostom, Homily 17 on First Timothy

{1 Tim 6:9}
Foolish desires, he says. And is it not a foolish desire, when men like to keep idiots and dwarfs, not from benevolent motives, but for their pleasure, when they have receptacles for fishes in their halls, when they bring up wild beasts, when they give their time to dogs, and dress up horses, and are as fond of them as of their children? All these things are foolish and superfluous, nowise necessary, nowise useful.   Location: 60,550  John Chrysostom, Homily 17 on First Timothy

{1 Tim 6:15}
Ver. 15. Which in His times He shall show, Who is the blessed and only Potentate, King of kings, and Lord of lords, Who only has immortality, dwelling in the light which no man can approach unto. Of whom are these things said? Of the Father, or of the Son? Of the Son, undoubtedly.



{1 Cor 12:25-27}
But if our body ought not to be divided, much less the body of Christ,    location 398118
John Chrysostom: Homily XXXII on 1 Corinthians.

{1 Cor 12:27}
But what is the expression, "severally?" "So far at least as appertaineth to you; and so far as naturally a part should be built up from you." For because he had said, "the body," whereas the whole body was not the Corinthian Church, but the Church in every part of the world, therefore he said, "severally:" i.e., the Church amongst you is a part of the Church existing every where and of the body which is made up of all the Churches: so that not only with yourselves alone, but also with the whole Church throughout the world, ye ought to be at peace,    location 398120
John Chrysostom: Homily XXXII on 1 Corinthians.

{1 Cor 12:28}
[2.] Ver. 28. "And God hath set some in the Church: first apostles, secondly prophets, thirdly teachers, then miracles, then gifts of healings, helps, governments, divers kinds of tongues."    location 398124
Because they thought highly of themselves in respect of the tongues he sets it last every where. For the terms, "first" and "secondly," are not used by him here at random, but in order by enumeration to point out the more honorable and the inferior.    location 398126
John Chrysostom: Homily XXXII on 1 Corinthians.

{1 Cor 12:28; 1 Tim 4:14}
"Secondly, prophets." For they used to prophesy, as the daughters of Philip, as Agabus, as these very persons among the Corinthians, of whom he saith, "Let the prophets speak, two or three." (c. xiv. 29.) And writing also to Timothy, he said, "Neglect not the gift that is in thee, which was given thee by prophecy." (1 Tim. iv. 14.) And they were much more many that prophesied.    location 398130
John Chrysostom: Homily XXXII on 1 Corinthians.

{Mt 11:13}
Christ saith, "The Law and the Prophets prophesied until John," (S. Matt. xi. 13.) He saith it of those prophets who before proclaimed His coming.    location 398133
John Chrysostom: Homily XXXII on 1 Corinthians.

{1 Cor 12:28; 1 Tim 5:17}
"Thirdly, teachers." For he that prophesies speaks all things from the Spirit; but he that teaches sometimes discourses also out of his own mind. Wherefore also he said, "Let the elders that rule well be counted worthy of double honor, especially they who labor in the word and in teaching:" (1 Tim. v. 17.) whereas he that speaks all things by the Spirit doth not labor. This accordingly is the reason why he set him after the prophet, because the one is wholly a gift but the other is also man's labor.    location 398134
John Chrysostom: Homily XXXII on 1 Corinthians.

{1 Cor 12:28}
[3.] "Then miracles, then gifts of healings." See how he again divides the healings from the power, which also he did before. For the power is more than the healing: since he that hath power both punishes and heals, but he that hath the gift of healings doeth cures only.    location 398139
John Chrysostom: Homily XXXII on 1 Corinthians.

{1 Cor 12:28}
But this twofold mode of teaching, I mean that by deeds and by words, no bad man would ever undertake. As to his setting the prophets first marvel not at it. For he is not speaking of prophets simply, but of those who by prophecy do also teach and say everything to the common benefit: which in proceeding he makes more clear to us.    location 398153
John Chrysostom: Homily XXXII on 1 Corinthians.

{1 Cor 12:28}
"Helps, governments." What is, "helps?" To support the weak. Is this then a gift, tell me? In the first place, this too is of the Gift of God, aptness for a patron's office ; the dispensing spiritual things; besides which he calls many even of our own good deeds, "gifts;" not meaning us to lose heart, but showing that in every case we need God's help,    location 398156
John Chrysostom: Homily XXXII on 1 Corinthians.

{1 Cor 12:28}
"Divers kind of tongues." Seest thou where he hath set this gift, and how he everywhere assigns it the last rank?    location 398159
John Chrysostom: Homily XXXII on 1 Corinthians.

{1 Cor 12:28-29}
whereas, I say, he had above exhorted them by these topics, here and henceforth he uses language so as to bear them down and rebuke them. For, as I said, it behoves us neither always to exhort people nor always to silence them.    location 398176
John Chrysostom: Homily XXXII on 1 Corinthians.

{1 Cor 12:30}
Ver. 30. "Do all speak with tongues? do all interpret?" For even as the great gifts God hath not vouchsafed all to all men, but to some this, and to others that, so also did He in respect of the less, not proposing these either to all. And this He did, procuring thereby abundant harmony and love, that each one standing in need of the other might be brought close to his brother.    location 398185
John Chrysostom: Homily XXXII on 1 Corinthians.

{1 Cor 12:31}
Ver. 31. "Desire earnestly," saith he, "the better gifts. And a still more excellent way show I unto you." Now by saying this, he gently hinted that they were the cause of their own receiving the lesser gifts, and had it in their power, if they would, to receive the greater.    location 398191
John Chrysostom: Homily XXXII on 1 Corinthians.

{1 Cor 12:31}
And he said not, the greater gifts, but "the better," i.e., the more useful, those which would profit. And what he means is this: "continue to desire gifts; and I point out to you a fountain of gifts." For neither did he say, "a gift," but "a way," that he might the more extol that which he intends to mention. As if he said, It is not one, or two, or three gifts that I point out to you, but one way which leadeth to all these : and not merely a way, but both "a more excellent way" and one that is open in common to all.    location 398194
John Chrysostom: Homily XXXII on 1 Corinthians.

{1 Cor 13:1-2}
seeing also that from neglect of it sprang that which caused all their evils. So that in this respect also it might justly appear great, if the gifts not only brought them not together, but divided them even when united: but this, when many were so divided, would reunite them by virtue of its own and make them one body.    location 398206
John Chrysostom: Homily XXXII on 1 Corinthians.

{1 Cor 13:3}
[8.] Ver. 3. "And if I bestow all my goods to feed the poor, and if I give my body to be burned, but have not love, it profiteth me nothing."    location 398248
And he said not, "give," but, "distribute in morsels ," so that to the expense may be added the administering also with all care.    location 398251
John Chrysostom: Homily XXXII on 1 Corinthians.

{1 Cor 13:3; Gal 1:8}
I grant, indeed, he that is ready to be burned and hath the gifts, may perhaps possibly not have love: but he who not only gives his goods, but even distributes them in morsels; how hath not he love? What then are we to say? Either that he supposed an unreal case as real; which kind of thing he is ever wont to do, when he intends to set before us something in excess; as when writing to the Galatians he saith, "If we or an angel from heaven preach any other gospel unto you than that ye receive let him be accursed."  ... to signify that he meant to carry the matter as far as possible, he set down even that which could never by any means happen.    location 398275
John Chrysostom: Homily XXXII on 1 Corinthians.

{Eccl 18:16-17; Mt 9:30; Hos 6:6}
Therefore one saith in another place also; "a good word is better than a gift;" (Ecclus. xviii. 16, 17.) and, "behold, a word is beyond a good gift." (Ecclus. xviii. 16, 17.) And He Himself saith, "I will have mercy, and not sacrifice." (S. Matt. ix. 30; Hos. vi. 6.)    location 398284
John Chrysostom: Homily XXXII on 1 Corinthians.

{1 Cor 13:4-7}
how great benefits would ensue: how there were no need then of laws, or tribunals or punishments, or avenging, or any other such things since if all loved and were beloved, no man would injure another. Yea, murders, and strifes, and wars, and divisions, and rapines, and frauds, and all evils would be removed, and vice be unknown even in name. Miracles, however, would not have effected this; they rather puff up such as are not on their guard, unto vain-glory and folly.    location 398303
John Chrysostom: Homily XXXII on 1 Corinthians.

{1 Cor 13:1-7}
if thou wilt, first suppose one single person beloved, and one loving; loving, however, as it is proper to love. Why, he will so live on earth as if it were heaven, everywhere enjoying a calm and weaving for himself innumerable crowns. For both from envy, and wrath, and jealousy, and pride, and vain-glory, and evil concupiscence, and every profane love, and every distemper, such a man will keep his own soul pure. Yea, even as no one would do himself an injury so neither would this man his neighbors. And being such, he shall stand with Gabriel himself, even while he walks on earth. Such then is he that hath love. But he that works miracles and hath perfect knowledge, without this, though he raises ten thousand from the dead, will not be much profited,    location 398311
John Chrysostom: Homily XXXII on 1 Corinthians.

{1 Cor 13:1-7}
Yea, and if this [perfect love] were duly observed, there would be neither slave nor free, neither ruler nor ruled, neither rich nor poor, neither small nor great. Rather there would be no poverty, no unbounded wealth, if there were love, but the good parts only from each estate.  ... And why do I mention the advantages arising from it? Yea, rather consider how great a blessing it is of itself to exercise love; what cheerfulness it produces, in how great grace it establishes the soul. Though anyone be a slave, it renders slavery sweeter that liberty. For he who loveth rejoices not so much in commanding, as in being commanded,    location 398337
John Chrysostom: Homily XXXII on 1 Corinthians.

{Gen 39:7-20}
When Joseph ascended the throne and became ruler of all Egypt, he did not remember the wrong done by the woman nor exact any punishment.    location 398385
John Chrysostom: Homily XXXII on 1 Corinthians.

{2 Cor 11:29}
[14.] Therefore Paul saith, that the love which we are speaking of is the mother of all good things, and prefers it to miracles and all other gifts. ... Since Paul himself we admire on this account, not for the dead whom he raised, nor for the lepers whom he cleansed, but because he said, "who is weak, and I am not weak? who is made to stumble, and I burn not?" (2 Cor. xi. 29.)    location 398398
John Chrysostom: Homily XXXII on 1 Corinthians.

{1 Cor 13:8}
But whether there be prophecies, they shall be done away; whether there be tongues, they shall cease; whether there be knowledge, it shall be done away.   
If both these were brought in in order to the faith; when that is everywhere sown abroad, the use of these is henceforth superfluous. But the loving one another shall not cease, rather it shall even advance further, both here and hereafter, and then more than now. For here there are many things that weaken our love; wealth, business, passions of the body, disorders of the soul; but there none of these.    location 398696
John Chrysostom: Homily XXXIV on 1 Corinthians.

{1 Cor 13:9-10}
10. "We know in part, and we prophesy in part. But when that which is perfect is come, then that which is in part shall be done away." It is not therefore knowledge that is done away, but the fact that our knowledge is in part.    location 398705
John Chrysostom: Homily XXXIV on 1 Corinthians.

{1 Cor 13:11-12}
Next he points out also how great is the distance between the two, and that our deficiency is no small one, saying, Ver. 11. "When I was a child, I spake as a child, I felt as a child, I thought as a child; but now that I am become a man, I have put away childish things." And by another example too he manifests the same thing again, saying, Ver. 12. "For now we see in a mirror."    location 398710
John Chrysostom: Homily XXXIV on 1 Corinthians.

{Acts 17:26; Rom 5:12; 1 Cor 15:22}
first, He granted one head to all, Adam. For why do we not all spring out of the earth? Why not full grown, as he was? In order that both the birth and the bringing up of children, and the being born of another, might bind us mutually together. ... if now, being only separated by place, we consider ourselves alien from one another; much more would this have happened if our race had had two originals.    location 398770
John Chrysostom: Homily XXXIV on 1 Corinthians.

{Gen 2:24; Acts 17:26}
For this cause therefore, as it were from one head, he bound together the whole body of the human race. And because from the beginning they seemed to be in a manner two, see how he fastens them together again, and gathers them into one by marriage. For, "therefore," saith He, "shall a man leave his father and his mother, and shall cleave unto his wife; and they shall be for one flesh." (Gen. ii. 24) And he said not, "the woman," but, "the man," because the desire too is stronger in him. Yea, and for this cause He made it also stronger, that it might bow the superior party to the absolute sway of this passion, and might subjugate it to the weaker.    location 398772
John Chrysostom: Homily XXXIV on 1 Corinthians.

{1 Cor 11:3}
Further, in order that the one might be subject, and the other rule; (for equality is wont oftentimes to bring in strife;) he suffered it not to be a democracy, but a monarchy; and as in an army, this order one may see in every family. In the rank of monarch, for instance, there is the husband; but in the rank of lieutenant and general, the wife; and the children too are allotted a third station in command. Then after these a fourth order, that of the servant. For these also bear rule over their inferiors, and some one of them is oftentimes set over the whole, keeping ever the post of the master, but still as a servant. And together with this again another command, and among the children themselves again another, according to their age and sex; since among the children the female doth not possess equal sway. And everywhere hath God made governments    location 398779
John Chrysostom: Homily XXXIV on 1 Corinthians.

{Acts 17:26}
For both our being of the same substance leads to this. ... And He devised also another foundation of affection. For having forbidden the marriage of kindred, he led us out unto strangers and drew them again unto us. ... He connected us anew by marriage, uniting together whole families by the single person of the bride, and mingling entire races with races.    location 398799
John Chrysostom: Homily XXXIV on 1 Corinthians.

{Acts 17:26}
For if one that wanted a physician, or a carpenter, or any other workman, had need to set off on a long foreign sojourn, the whole had come to nought. Here then is why He founded cities also, and brought all into one place. And accordingly that we might easily keep up intercourse with distant countries, He spread the level of the sea between us, and gave us the swiftness of winds, thereby making our voyages easy. And at the beginning He even gathered all men together in one spot, and did not disperse them until they who first received the gift abused their concord unto sin. However, He hath drawn us together in every way; both by nature, and by consanguinity, and by language,    location 398810
John Chrysostom: Homily XXXIV on 1 Corinthians.

{1 Cor 11:3; 1 Cor 12:11}
And from the beginning He made one sovereignty only, setting the man over the woman. But after that our race ran headlong into extreme disorder, He appointed other sovereignties also, those of masters, and those of governors, and this too for love's sake. That is, since vice was a thing apt to dissolve and subvert our race, He set those who administer justice in the midst of our cities as a kind of physicians, that driving away vice, as it were a plague to love, they might gather together all in one. And that not only in cities, but also in each family there might be great unanimity, He honored the man with rule and superiority; the woman on the other hand He armed with desire. And the gift also of procreation of children, He committed in common to both. ... He furnished also other things apt to conciliate love: neither entrusting all to the man, nor all to the woman; but "dividing these things also severally to each;" to her entrusting the house, and to him the market; to him the work of feeding, for he tills the ground; to her that of clothing, for loom and distaff are the woman's. For it is God Himself who gave to woman-kind skill in woven work. Woe be to covetousness, which does not permit this difference to appear! For the general effeminacy hath gone so far as to introduce our men to the looms,   location 398825
John Chrysostom: Homily XXXIV on 1 Corinthians.


{1 Cor 12:20-27; 1 Jn 3:16-18}
It is not, we see, the poor only who need the rich, but the rich also the poor; and these require those more than the others them.    location 398833
John Chrysostom: Homily XXXIV on 1 Corinthians.

{1 Cor 14:1}
Follow after love, yet desire earnestly spiritual gifts; but rather that ye may prophesy.    location 398930

Wherefore also he said, "Follow after:" for he that is in chase beholds that only which is chased, and towards that he strains himself, and leaves not off until he lay hold of it.    location 398933
John Chrysostom: Homily XXXV on 1 Corinthians.


{1 Cor 14:3}
Ver. 3. "But he that prophesieth speaketh unto men edification, and exhortation, and comfort."    location 398944
At this point he makes a comparison between the gifts, and lowers that of the tongues, showing it to be neither altogether useless, nor very profitable by itself. ... Why then did the Apostles receive it before the rest? Because they were to go abroad everywhere. And as in the time of building the tower the one tongue was divided into many; so then the many tongues frequently met in one man, and the same person used to discourse both in the Persian, and the Roman, and the Indian, and many other tongues, the Spirit sounding within him: and the gift was called the gift of tongues because he could all at once speak divers languages.    location 398948
John Chrysostom: Homily XXXV on 1 Corinthians.

{1 Cor 14:3; 1 Cor 1:12}
"But he that prophesieth speaketh unto men edification, and exhortation, and comfort." Seest thou by what he signifies the choice nature of this gift? i.e., by the common benefit? and how everywhere he gives the higher honor to that which tends to the profit of the many? ... Since not even in his own person doth he shrink from pointing out its [tongues] unprofitableness. And indeed it is his constant way to work out the disagreeable topics in his own person: as in the beginning of the Epistle he said, "Who then is Paul? and who is Apollos? and who is Cephas?"    location 398980
John Chrysostom: Homily XXXV on 1 Corinthians.

{1 Cor 14:8}
Ver. 8. "For if the trumpet give an uncertain voice, who shall prepare himself for war?"    For in that also there are certain measures; and they give out at one time a warlike note, and at another one that is not so; and again sometimes it leads out to line of battle and at others recalls from it: and unless one know this, there is great danger.    location 398996
John Chrysostom: Homily XXXV on 1 Corinthians.

{1 Cor 14:12}
Ver. 12. "So also ye, since as ye are zealous of spiritual gifts, seek that ye may abound unto the edifying of the Church."  ... For if a man should speak only in the Persian, or any other foreign tongue, and not understand what he saith, then of course to himself also will he be thenceforth a barbarian, not to another only, from not knowing the meaning of the sound. For there were of old many who had also a gift of prayer, together with a tongue; and they prayed, and the tongue spoke, praying either in the Persian or Latin language , but their understanding knew not what was spoken.    location 399040
John Chrysostom: Homily XXXV on 1 Corinthians.

{1 Cor 14:15-16}
What then may that be which is best in itself, and doth good? And how ought one to act, or what request of God? To pray, "both with the spirit," i.e., the gift, and "with the understanding."    ... Observe how again here he brings his stone to the plumb-line, every where seeking the edification of the Church.  ... "if thou shalt bless in a barbarian tongue, not knowing what thou sayest, nor able to interpret, the layman cannot respond the Amen. For not hearing the words, forever and ever,' which are at the end , he doth not say the Amen."    location 399054
John Chrysostom: Homily XXXV on 1 Corinthians.

{1 Cor 14:18-19}
Ver. 18. "I thank God, speaking with tongues more than ye all."  ... And this he doth also in another place intending, namely, to take away the advantages of Judaism and to show that henceforth they are nothing, he begins by declaring that himself had been endowed with them, yea, and that in very great excess; and then he calls them "loss,"    ...  "Than ten thousand words in a tongue." Wherefore? "That I may instruct others," saith he. For the one hath but display only; the other, great utility: this being what he everywhere seeks, I mean the common profit.    location 399072
John Chrysostom: Homily XXXV on 1 Corinthians.

{Acts 14:13-14}
Such was Simon [Magus], who, because he looked to vain-glory, did not even see his own advantage. Such also were the Jews, who because of this sacrificed their own salvation to the devil.    ... But not so the Apostles: that they were pure from vainglory, they showed by their doings: in that, when some were calling them Gods and were ready to sacrifice-unto them oxen with garlands, they did not merely just forbid what was doing, but they even rent their clothes. (Acts xiv. 13, 14.) And after they had set the lame man upright, when all with open mouths were gazing at them, they said, "Why look ye so earnestly on us, as though by our own power we had made this man to walk ?"    location 399085
John Chrysostom: Homily XXXV on 1 Corinthians.

{2 Cor 11:27; Gal 2:10; Acts 24:17}
Thus they [others] did everything for vain-glory. But not so the Apostles; rather they both received what was given them, and distributed to the needy with so great liberality that they even lived in continual hunger. But if they had been enamored of glory, they would not have practiced this, the receiving and distributing, for fear of some suspicion arising against them.    location 399092
John Chrysostom: Homily XXXV on 1 Corinthians.

{Gen 13:2-11}
so ordering one's own life [free from vainglory]. For so the patriarch Abraham.-nay, let none accuse me of tautology if I often make mention of him, and on all occasions: this being that which most of all shows him wonderful, and deprives them that refuse to imitate him of all excuse. ... But when one and the same person is found to possess all, what excuse will they have, who after the Law and grace are not able to attain unto the same measure with them that were before the law and grace? How then did this Patriarch overcome and subdue this monster, when he had a dispute with his nephew?   
 location 399110
John Chrysostom: Homily XXXV on 1 Corinthians.

{Gen 18:1-8; Gen 24:2-4}
Again, Abraham entertained strangers, yet did he not here act vain-gloriously, but himself both ran to them and bowed down to them, not as though he were giving, but receiving a benefit, and he calleth them lords, without knowing who they are who are come to him, and presents his wife in the place of a handmaiden. ... And when he sent to betroth a wife for his son, he gave no command to speak in high and dignified terms of him, (Gen. xxiv.) but merely to bring the bride.    location 399122
John Chrysostom: Homily XXXV on 1 Corinthians.

{2 Cor 10:10; 2 Cor 13:7}
Consider, I pray, this same Apostle who speaks these things, how he ever ascribes the whole to God, how of his sins he makes mention continually, but of his good deeds never, unless perchance it should be needful to correct the disciples; and even if he be compelled to do this, he calls the matter folly, and yields the first place to Peter, and is not ashamed to labor with Priscilla and Aquila, and everywhere he is eager to show himself lowly. ... Wherefore also he said, "but his bodily presence is weak." (2 Cor. x. 10.) i.e., easy to be despised, and not at all accompanied with display. And again, "I pray that ye do no evil, not that we may appear approved."    location 399128
John Chrysostom: Homily XXXV on 1 Corinthians.

{Phil 4:11-12; 1 Tim 6:9-10}
Knowing therefore these things, let us not shun poverty, let us not admire riches: but prepare our soul to be sufficient for all estates. ... For whom doth not the rich man fear? Are there not robbers, potentates, enviers, informers?  ... Now the accursed hands of the tomb-breakers do not even abstain from these, [the corpse of a rich man] but move and turn it about, and with much cruelty insult it. For after it hath been committed to the ground, having stripped it both of its covering of earth and of that which its grave-clothes constitute, they leave it thus to be cast out. ... So wealth even after death exacts a most bitter punishment, exposing them naked and unburied, a dreadful and pitiable spectacle: since even those who suffer this after sentence and by the anger of their judges, do not suffer so grievously as these. For they [criminals] indeed remain unburied the first and second day, and thereafter are committed to the ground; but these, when they have been committed to the ground, are then stripped naked and insulted.  ... Such is our enjoyment of wealth; to be insulted even after death, and deprived of sepulture which even the most desperate criminals obtain.    location 399185
John Chrysostom: Homily XXXV on 1 Corinthians.

{1 Jn 3:16-19; Jas 2:15-16}
when wealth is shut up and preserved, then it destroys its possessors and hoarders. But let us make this beast tame. And it will be tame, if we do not shut it up, but give it into the hands of all who are in need. So shall we reap from this quarter the greatest blessings,   location 399196
John Chrysostom: Homily XXXV on 1 Corinthians.

